\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename else
@settitle ELSE Users Manual
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex
@c %**end of header

@c Some global values used in the info file
@set doc_version 1.5
@set ELSE_version 1.20
@set issue_date 26th August, 2004

@set expand @kbd{C-c / e}
@set next @kbd{C-c / n}
@set prev @kbd{C-c / p}
@set kill @kbd{C-c / k}
@set comment @kbd{C-c / c}
@set uncomment @kbd{C-c / u}
@set insert @kbd{C-c / i}
@set full_expand @code{else-expand-placeholder} (@value{expand})
@set full_next @code{else-next-placeholder} (@value{next})
@set full_prev @code{else-previous-placeholder} (@value{prev})
@set full_kill @code{else-kill-placeholder} (@value{kill})
@set full_compile @code{else-compile-buffer}
@c @setchapternewpage odd

@ifinfo
This file documents the Emacs Language Sensitive Editor (ELSE) minor mode.

This version is edition @value{doc_version} of the ELSE User Manual. It
corresponds to ELSE Version @value{ELSE_version} 

Copyright (C) 1999 - 2003 Peter Milliken

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on all
copies.
     
@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
     
@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this manual
under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License'' are included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.
     
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual into
another language, under the above conditions for modified versions, except that
this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved by the Free
Software Foundation.

@dircategory Editors
@direntry
* ELSE: (else).      Emacs Language Sensitive Editor mode.
@end direntry

@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Emacs Language Sensitive Editor (ELSE)
@subtitle A minor mode for Emacs.
@subtitle ELSE Version @value{ELSE_version}.
@subtitle Manual version @value{doc_version}, @value{issue_date}.

@author Peter Milliken @footnote{email contact: 
@email{peterm@@unwired.com.au}
@email{peterm@@resmed.com.au}(my work address -- which may change at a moments notice in these days of ``outsourcing'' jobs to other countries)}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 - 2003, 2004 Peter Milliken
@sp 2
Edition @value{doc_version} @*
Revised for ELSE Version @value{ELSE_version},@*
@value{issue_date}.@*
@sp 2

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on all
copies.
     
@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
     
@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this manual
under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License'' are included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.
     
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual into
another language, under the above conditions for modified versions, except that
this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved by the Free
Software Foundation.

@end titlepage
@contents

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This Info file contains edition @value{doc_version} of the ELSE Users Manual,
corresponding to Version @value{ELSE_version} of the Elisp file else-mode.el.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Introduction::                
* Overview::                    
* Installation Instructions::   
* Default Keybindings::         
* Command Summary::             
* Using ELSE::                  
* Creating and Modifying Templates::  
* Custom Variables::            
* Technical Notes::             
* Compatibility::               
* Notes for VR Coding::         
* Template Availability::       
* Tutorial::                    
* Concept Index::               

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview of ELSE

* Typographical Conventions::   Definitions of special characters used.
* Definitions::                 Definitions of special terminology.

Using ELSE

* Invoking ELSE::               How to start it up and what you get.
* Navigating::                  
* Expanding Placeholders::      How to expand Placeholders.
* Expanding Tokens::            How to expand Tokens.
* Deleting Placeholders::       
* Preparing for Compilation::   
* Disabling ELSE::              Sometimes you just don't want ELSE to be active.

Creating and Modifying Templates

* Syntactic Conventions::       
* Customising An Existing Template Language::  
* Extracting Placeholders or Tokens::  
* Create a New Language::       How to create a new language template
* Definition of the Template Structure::  
* Example of Creating A New Language Template::  

Customising An Existing Template Language

* Extracting Placeholders or Tokens::          How to extract a placeholder or token

Creating a New Language

* Language Definition Template::  
* Overriding Language Attributes::  

Language Definition Template

* Language Identification::     
* Initial String::              
* Punctuation characters::      
* Self Insert Characters::      
* Valid Identifier Characters::  
* Indentation Size::            
* Template Version::            

Definition of the Template Structure

* Placeholders::                
* Tokens::                      
* Hooking Elisp Code into ELSE Templates::  

Placeholder Definition

* Delete Placeholder Statement::  
* Language Specifier::          
* Define Placeholder Statement::  
* Auto Text Substitute::        
* Description Specifier::       
* Duplication Specifier::       
* Separator Specification::     
* Type Specifier::              
* Template Body::               
* Placeholder Cross-Referencing::  
* End Define Command::          

Technical Notes

* Useful ELSE Defuns::          
* Editing Template Files::      
* ELSE and Hooks::              
* Building the Language Template File Name::  

ELSE and Hooks

* Building the Language Template File Name::

Tutorial

* Abbreviation Coding::         
* Whole Language Coding::       

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface
This manual documents the use and creation/customisation of language templates
for ELSE. There are two levels of reader assumed by this document; a user and a
language template maintainer. The two are not mutually exclusive. 

This manual is a mixture of user manual and reference manual. All readers are
recommended to read the Tutorial at the end of the manual (@xref{Tutorial}). In
addition, complete beginners to ELSE are recommended to read the first six
chapters (Overview --- Using ELSE) and then the chapter on Customising Variables
(but only after they have become familiar with ELSE). The rest of the manual is
for the more adventurous who wish to either customise existing ELSE templates or
create their own templates for any language that ELSE does not currently
support (please make them available to the wider community if you do).

If you dislike reading documentation then just focus on the sections for
installing ELSE (@xref{Installation Instructions},) and the Tutorial
@ref{Tutorial}. Once you have satisfied your initial curiosity about ELSE then
you can come back and read the other portions of the manual. ELSE is an
extremely powerful, but simple concept, so if you decide to persevere with using
ELSE then you will sooner or later find yourself reading the entire manual. Much
of ELSE's power comes from the ability for the user to customise the language
templates for his/her own programming style.


@end iftex

@node Introduction, Overview, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction

These days a number of packages exist for Emacs that provide what users think of
as ``templates'' or ``skeletons'' or code ``abbreviations''. When they first go
in search of something to help generate code they are thinking of something that
will allow the generation of common code constructs (usually control structures
or file/function headers) with a small number of keystrokes (similar to the
Emacs abbreviation facility). For instance, a user might be interested in a
package that generates an ``if'' statement, they envisage such as package
generally working like an abbreviation i.e. "if<some Emacs command/key
sequence>" which then leaves a tailored ``if'' construct in their buffer, where
they can then ``fill in the blank'' or missing portions of the code.

ELSE (@b{E}macs @b{L}anguage @b{S}ensitive @b{E}ditor) provides this
functionality via what is called ``tokens'' (@pxref{Expanding Tokens}) plus much
more. The following example shows the use of a token definition taken from the C
language templates, this definition generates an ``if'' construct. The
key--stroke sequence to generate this command (assumes installation of ELSE has
been achieved) is @kbd{if}@value{expand} with the following result in the
buffer:

@example
  if (@{expression@}) @{
    @{statement@}...
  @}
  [elsif_part]...
  [else_part]
@end example

@noindent
After the expansion, the cursor is automatically positioned within the first
placeholder (@code{@{expression@}} and the user can just start typing the
condition expression, ELSE will automatically delete the placeholder text and
replace it with the typed information.

ELSE takes what I will term a ``whole language'' approach to helping generate
code. Not only does it provide code ``abbreviations'' but it also provides
facilities that allow generation of a code file from initial empty buffer to
completed file - all without having to leave the template system. Indeed, it is
possible to code a typical language file without having to manually type a
single language keyword or construct. This ``whole language'' approach utilises
what is termed ``placeholders'' (@pxref{Expanding Placeholders}). Given a
sufficiently detailed language template file (one that closely mirrors the EBNF
@footnote{Extended Backus--Naur Form is a mechanism used by computer scientists
to describe the syntax of a computer language i.e. check section A.13 of
Kernighan and Ritchie's ``White book'' on the C language} for the language, for
instance), then it is possible to achieve this goal.

A brief tutorial is offered (@pxref{Tutorial}) showing the use of both
placeholders and tokens.

Most people, when they start to explore language sensitive editing, start out by
looking for a system that allows them to specify language ``templates'' --- a
facility that will allow them to type in an abbreviation which is then somehow
expanded to the full language construct i.e. `if' is expanded to the full syntax
of the particular language if statement. This is as far as they typically
envisage a templating package to work. ELSE provides this basic functionality
via what is termed ``tokens''. But ELSE goes much further than this, it provides
a system that allows the mimicking of the entire language syntax i.e. it offers
not only expansion of abbreviations but also allows menu choices and the
provision of information messages to the user --- all within the syntax of an
ASCII readable language definition file. The structure of the language
definition file is described fully in the reference portions of this manual
(@ref{Creating and Modifying Templates}).

You might be asking the question - how is ELSE different from any of the other
template packages available for Emacs? ELSE differs from other packages that aim
to achieve the same goals in several ways:
@enumerate

@item
ELSE language template definitions are specified using a purely ASCII, textural
syntax with no attempt at making them look ELisp-like. At least one user has
seen this as a disadvantage though :-). To be fair, his argument was that why
should he have to learn yet another ``language'' when if the template
definitions could be defined using Elisp style syntax? There is no easy answer
for this. As the author, I (obviously) thought that staying away from Elisp like
syntax would be a benefit to a user i.e. they don't have to learn Elisp to use
ELSE! At first glance, ELisp is not an easy language to pick up with its nested
brackets etc - miss one and you are history! :-).

@item
ELSE language definition syntax conforms with a commercially available
Editor@footnote{well, it is as close as my memory allowed when I moved from
using DEC LSE and creating a mimic of it --- users have reported very minor
syntactical differences that are easily catered for by editing the template
file}.

@item
The user interface for using ELSE is completely visual i.e. other
template/skeleton packages use an interface of questions/answers and have
invisible ``markers'' to points of interest in the syntax generated. Thus their
interface is not easy to use (once you embark into a Q&A session you are stuck
with completing it - many such sessions require you to know the full extent of
your code before you embark on it! e.g. how many case statements will be used in
a switch statement and exactly what are the cases in which the program should
take action? If you need further information to answer any of the questions then
there is no way to just ``interrupt'' the season, switch to another buffer and
look up the required information --- so you are either forced to continue on as
best you can or abandon the Q&A session entirely). ELSE's placeholders or
``markers'' persist across edit sessions because they are actual text in the
buffer, other template/skeleton packages use Emacs markers which are lost when
the edit session for that file is ended.

@item
ELSE offers features that are missing in other packages e.g. the ability to have
text automatically repeated as you type at a single place in multiple places
within the language syntax i.e. function names can be repeated at the end of the
function body as the name is typed by the user at the start of the
body@footnote{this is mandatory for some languages, also some project coding
standards demand a repetition of information that is found at the head of
construct to be repeated at the end of the construct i.e. copying the expression
portion of an if statement into a comment at the end of the if structure}. It is
possible to create flexible templates for commonly used language constructs
using this feature i.e. coding for loops in C often have a similar, repetitive
``pattern'', using this feature of ELSE, typing can be kept to a minimum as the
variable name is repeated in multiple places e.g.

@example
for (no_items = 0; no_items < 100; no_items++)
@end example
@noindent
is a very common construct - the auto-substitute feature of ELSE could allow the
user to create the above code pattern such that the variable ``no_items'' was
automatically repeated in two places as the first instance was typed by the
user.

@item
ELSE language definitions can model the original language syntax either as
loosely or closely as the template definition maintainer desires using a menu
system that provides choices that follow language syntax branching. Thus a user
can see what code syntax is possible at different points in the file without
necessarily having to be an expert in the language in which the code is being
generated. This means that ELSE can be a aid to beginning programmers as they
learn the language in which they are generating code.

@item
ELSE offers a more ``dynamic'' interface than other similar packages. The user
can ``extract'' and modify language template definitions ``on the fly'' whilst
in an Emacs edit session. These changes can be either temporary i.e. last for
the current edit session only or can be saved for future use in later
sessions. In fact, ELSE is so dynamic that you can actually extract the contents
of the entire language template set for the current edit session and save that
for later (re)use.

@item
And lastly (but not least :-)), ELSE is extensively documented.  Documentation
for competitive packages are only just starting to emerge, use of those packages
have thus been limited to those few who were prepared to invest the time to read
Elisp and a few scattered examples to learn how to use the packages. ELSE
template definition syntax and documentation hopefully allows even users who are
not interested in programming in Elisp to enjoy the fruits of language sensitive
editing quickly and (relatively) easily.

@end enumerate

@node Overview, Installation Instructions, Introduction, Top
@chapter Overview of ELSE

ELSE is an implementation of a minor mode for Emacs that provides language
sensitive editing capability to the currently enabled major mode (for the
current buffer) of Emacs. It is aimed fairly and squarely at providing support
to programmers for input of program text but as you will see it can be easily
customised for any task that involves repetitious input of common textual
sequences.

Use of ELSE will improve programmer productivity by reducing the amount of time
to enter the program/text in the first instance and in the second instance, it
will cut-down on time consuming errors due to typing mistakes i.e. syntax errors
that are usually found by the compiler during the compile - edit cycle
e.g. missing ;'s become a thing of the past.

The aim of ELSE is to reduce programming to an exercise of ``filling in the
blanks'', hence the use of the term @dfn{template} language. Language constructs
are the templates and the variable, procedure and function names are the
``blanks''.

There are a number of ways of implementing so called ``language sensitive
editing'' (lse) in an editor. The most common approaches seen in many editors
that offer this feature take a very ``primitive'' form where the programmer is
left feeling that he/she could just as easily do without e.g., many
implementations offer the following behaviour:

@enumerate
@item
offer macros that would fill in some of the language syntax by straight
generation of a portion of the chosen language statement leaving the user to
position the cursor manually to where variable entry is required and manual
deletion of (optional) portions of the syntax that are not required; or
@item
through a series of question/answer sessions, where at the end of the
sequence, the language statement is deemed ``complete'' and is entered into the
text buffer.
@end enumerate

These approaches tend to feel fairly ``intrusive'' to the programmer and are
generally awkward to use. In addition, they offer little or no help to the
novice in possible selections of syntax.

The approach to Language Sensitive Editing offered here for Emacs is modelled
after a feature found in a editor offered by Digital Equipment
Corporation@footnote{DEC has been purchased by Compaq, which has in turn been
purchased by Hewlett-Packard, but the product lines lives on AFAIK} called
LSE. This approach to the problem does not suffer from any of the usual
awkwardness associated with typical lse implementations. It provides a natural
framework for the programmer where the work is limited to menu selections and
``filling in the blanks'' e.g., a typical @dfn{template} (@pxref{Definitions})
in ELSE looks like:

@example
[context_clause]@dots{}
package @{program_unit_name@} is
  @{basic_declarative_item@}@dots{}
[private_part]
end [program_unit_name];
@end example

@noindent
This is the template for a @code{package} specification in Ada. Each of
the textual strings inclosed by @samp{@{@}}'s or @samp{[]}'s are
language @dfn{placeholders} (@pxref{Definitions}) that offer further
expansion possibilities through either menu selection, text substitution
or language prompts e.g., if the placeholder @samp{[context_clause]} is
@dfn{expanded} then the contents of the buffer will become:

@example
with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]
[context_clause]@dots{}
package @{program_unit_name@} is
  @{basic_declarative_item@}@dots{}
[private_part]
end [program_unit_name];
@end example

@noindent
Observe that the placeholder @samp{[context_clause]@dots{}} has been expanded
and replaced with the two lines:

@example

with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]
[context_clause]@dots{}

@end example
@noindent
Upon expansion, ELSE replaced the placeholder @code{context_clause} with its
definition, namely the text @code{with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{};
[use_clause]}. It detected that the placeholder was to be repeated (the
trailing @dots{}) and thus duplicated the placeholder being expanded onto the
next line.

After the expansion, the cursor will be automatically re-positioned
between the first set of @samp{@{@}}'s. The user then has options of
further expansion or performing straight text entry, if the text entry
option is exercised then the text within and including the @samp{@{@}}'s
is automatically deleted by the minor mode and replaced by the entered
text i.e. no awkward ``killing'' or ``deleting'' of text is required,
the minor mode recognises a valid@footnote{valid placeholder or token
strings are defined as a string that exists as a definition in the
currently enabled language definitions} placeholder and responds
appropriately e.g.,

@example

with TEXT_IO, [library_unit_name]@dots{}; [use_clause]@dots{}

@end example

@noindent
Note that the user has only typed the text @code{TEXT_IO}, the `,' and the
repetition of the (optional) syntax/placeholder
@code{[library_unit_name]@dots{}} was automatically supplied by the minor mode
functionality. Just as `conveniently', if the programmer decides that a second
@code{library_unit_name} is not required then the placeholder can be deleted
(@value{full_expand}) using a single command with the following to result:

@example

with TEXT_IO; [use_clause]@dots{}

@end example
@noindent
Note that ELSE has performed appropriate ``housekeeping'' and that the `,' has
been automatically deleted as nolonger required and the `;' character is flush
against the package name (TEXT_IO). Similarly, the @code{[use_clause]}
placeholder can be expanded upon or deleted.

The preceeding examples have shown how ELSE offers language sensitive
editing via the @dfn{placeholder} mechanism. Another mechanism offered by
ELSE for quick generation of language syntax is via the expansion of
@dfn{token's}. A token is usually used where no placeholders are available
i.e.  the programmer has deleted all placeholders but wants to add further
code to a particular section. He/She has the option of either typing in a
placeholder, such as, @code{@{statement@}}@dots{} or if a simple construct is
all that is needed, then he/she can type in a token and perform expansion upon
it. A @dfn{token} is an abbreviated string that has been defined in the
language templates to be expanded to a full construct e.g.

@smallexample
@group
@b{Code before entry} with the ``token'' inserted at the desired point:

    Value1 := 10;
    Value2 := 20;

    if                        <---- require an ``if'' statement here

    Value3 := Value1 * Value2;

@end group
@end smallexample

@example
@group
@b{Code after token is expanded}:

    Value1 := 10;
    Value2 := 20;

    if @{condition@} then
      @{statement@}@dots{}
    [elsif_part]
    [else_part]
    end if;

    Value3 := Value1 * Value2;
@end group
@end example

In the previous example, the abbreviation ``if'' is a token defined in the Ada language
templates which is defined to expand to an ``if statement'' template.

@menu
* Typographical Conventions::   Definitions of special characters used.
* Definitions::                 Definitions of special terminology.
@end menu

@node Typographical Conventions, Definitions, Overview, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Typographical Conventions

ELSE uses the following typographical conventions:

@enumerate
@item
Curly braces @samp{@{@}}'s --- denote a mandatory entry e.g. @code{with
@{library_unit_name@}}, the language requires that a package name be
supplied. Mandatory entries cannot be deleted (using the
@value{full_kill} command, that is), the user is warned by a
error message in the command line of the editor.
@item
Square braces @samp{[]}'s --- denote an optional entry e.g. @code{[context_clause]}
can be either deleted or `expanded'.
@item
3 Dots @dots{} --- denote the fact that the preceeding (or `attached')
placeholder will be `automatically' repeated by the minor mode functionality
when the user performs any actions other than the
@value{full_kill} command.
@item
@expansion{} --- denotes the results of an @dfn{expansion} of either a
placeholder or token e.g.
@example
[context_clause]@dots{} @expansion{} with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]
@end example
@end enumerate

@node Definitions,  , Typographical Conventions, Overview
@section Definitions

The following terminology is used in this manual:

@cindex placeholder
@cindex token
@cindex expand
@cindex abbrev
@cindex abbreviation

@enumerate
@item
@samp{placeholder} --- Term used to denote a textual string that is
recognisable or @dfn{defined} in the currently selected `language'
mode. The string is enclosed by either @samp{[]}'s or @samp{@{@}}'s
(@pxref{Typographical Conventions}).
@item
@samp{token} --- A (usually short) textual string that has been @dfn{defined} in
the currently active language template. It can be expanded to provide a language
template. This is (usually) used as a shorthand way of inserting a particular
language construct. Tokens are textual strings which are not enclosed by
@samp{[]}'s or @samp{@{@}}'s.
@item
@samp{expand} or @samp{expansion} --- Denotes the execution of the command
@samp{else-expand-placeholder}.
@end enumerate

@node Installation Instructions, Default Keybindings, Overview, Top
@comment Installation instructions.
@chapter Installation Instructions

@cindex Installation

To install ELSE, copy the Emacs Lisp file `else-mode.el' anywhere into the load
path of your installation of Emacs (I use the `site-lisp' directory). Place the
following command into your .emacs file:
@example
(require 'else-mode)
@end example

ELSE also optionally supports the use of a support package called setnu.el
(mirrored/available from the same place that you copied else-mode.el). This
package is written by Kyle E. Jones and provides line numbering support (if
enabled - @xref{Custom Variables}.) to the display of menu choices. This feature
is available so that individuals using voice coding systems can easily pick the
desired menu choice. The setnu.el package should be copied to the same spot as
else-mode.el.

It is recommended, but not necessary, that you install the ELSE info
documentation. ELSE documentation consists of a TexInfo file (else.texi), an
info file (else.info) and a PDF file (else.pdf). Copy the info file (else.info)
into the Emacs Info directory and add the following line to the `dir' file that
can be found in the Emacs info directory:

@example
* ELSE: (else.info).    Emacs Language Sensitive Editor.
@end example

ELSE comes with a number of template definition files (@pxref{Template
Availability}). Place the desired template definition files anywhere in the
Emacs `load-path' (the site-lisp directory is fine).

@node Default Keybindings, Command Summary, Installation Instructions, Top
@chapter Default Keybindings

Following the recommendations of the Elisp manual regarding minor modes,
ELSE provides a minor-mode map i.e. a map that is active only when the
minor mode is active, that binds the four main commands of ELSE as
follows:
@enumerate
@item
else-expand-placeholder - @value{expand}
@item
else-next-placeholder - @value{next}
@item
else-previous-placeholder - @value{prev}
@item
else-kill-placeholder - @value{kill}
@end enumerate

Some lessor used commands and their bindings are:
@enumerate
@item
else-comment-placeholders - @value{comment}
@item
else-uncomment-placeholders - @value{uncomment}
@item
else-insert-placeholder - @value{insert}
@end enumerate

Note that these bindings are purely provided to conform with the conventions
for such things as specified in the Emacs Lisp manual. My personal preference
is to bind the main four commands to @kbd{F3 - F6}. A 'quirk' of the operation
of ELSE that is worth mentioning is that when selecting items from the menu
display, the command @code{else-expand-placeholder} can also be used to select
an item i.e. first instance of the command over a placeholder will bring up a
menu of choices and then a second press of the keybinding will provide a
selection request - this provides faster and convenient selection for the user
at times e.g. a commonly selected menu option can be a quick as
@kbd{F3}/@kbd{F3} (assuming the desired option is the first entry in the menu
--- if it isn't then ``customise'' that placeholder definition and swap the
order of menu item!). 

For the convenience of novice/beginning Emacs programmers, here are the key
definitions that I use (place them in your .emacs or emacs.el file --- whichever
one you use):

@example
(global-set-key [f3] 'else-expand-placeholder)
(global-set-key [f4] 'else-next-placeholder)
(global-set-key [f5] 'else-previous-placeholder)
(global-set-key [f6] 'else-kill-placeholder)
@end example

A further ``nice to have'' in your .emacs file is to have else--mode turned on
automatically for each file that you edit. An example of how to turn on ELSE for
c-mode (C source files) is:

@example
(add-hook 'c-mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            ;; this is shown as a lambda so you can add further interesting
            ;; minor mode definitions here.
            (else-mode)))
@end example

Refer to the Emacs manual for further information on major mode hooks, when and
how they are run to achieve customisation of an edit environment.
@node Command Summary, Using ELSE, Default Keybindings, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Command Summary

The following user commands are provided by ELSE.

@deffn Command else-mode
Toggles the minor mode for the current buffer. If the buffer is empty then it
inserts the @dfn{initial_string}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-expand-placeholder
If the cursor is positioned within a @dfn{placeholder}
(@pxref{Definitions}) then the placeholder is expanded @footnote{Note
that if the placeholder text within the @samp{@{@}}'s or @samp{[]}'s is
not defined then the command will not recognise the placeholder string,
this is a common error when the user has manually (mis-)typed a
placeholder and can't work out why ELSE won't expand it.} according to
the rules for the definition of that placeholder name. If the command is
executed with the cursor immediately positioned after a valid token then
the rules defined for that token are used in the expansion.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-next-placeholder
Moves the cursor to the next valid placeholder in the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-previous-placeholder
Moves the cursor to the previous valid placeholder in the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-kill-placeholder
Kills or deletes the placeholder in which the cursor is currently
positioned. Note that a numeric argument @kbd{C-u} will force a kill even when
the placeholder is mandatory.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive Command} else-cleanup-placeholders
Command to delete every placeholder remaining in the current buffer. Mandatory
and optional placeholders are all deleted using the else-kill-placeholder
command.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-comment-placeholders
Uses the comment syntax for the currently defined major mode to ``comment
out'' any placeholders in the source file that have not been expanded or
deleted. This command is useful for when a compilation is desired but coding
is not yet deemed complete ie there are still placeholders in the buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-compile-buffer
Command to ``compile'' the language definitions found at `point' to the end of
the buffer. When supplied with a numeric argument (@kbd{C-u}) will
compile definitions from the beginning of the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-compile-fast-load
Command to generate a ``fast'' load version of a language template file. A
version of the language template file is created using the Emacs Lisp``read''
syntax. When ELSE attempts to load a new language definition file it will first
look for a ``fast load'' version of the file. Please note that this command is a
``hold-over'' from the days when PC's were very slow, this command probably
should @b{not} be used as it will be removed from future versions of ELSE.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive command} else-extract-all
Extract all of the placeholders, tokens and the language definition for the
current language into the current buffer at `point'.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive command} else-extract-placeholder placeholder
Prompts the user for a valid placeholder name and then extracts the placeholder
definition into the current buffer (@pxref{Customising An Existing Template Language}).
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive command} else-extract-token token
Prompts the user for a valid token name and then extracts the token definition
into the current buffer (@pxref{Customising An Existing Template Language}).
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive Command} else-insert-placeholder
Command to insert a placeholder string at point into the current buffer. It
expects some leading characters of the placeholder prior to point at the time
the command is invoked (these character must be preceeded by a "@{" or "["
character). It will use this abbreviation to perform auto-completion on the
placeholders loaded for the current language template file. If there are more
than one possibilities, then the command will provide auto-completion of the
unique portion of the placeholder and then stop, a second invocation will split
the window and display a list of possible completions. This second window must
be deleted manually (in the current version - a future release will probably fix
this problem).
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive Command} else-move-n-placeholders
Command to move to the ``next'' placeholder where ``next'' is controlled by the
@code{else-direction} custom variable i.e. if @code{else-direction} is on then
this command will invoked the @value{full_next} command, if the
@code{else-direction} flag is off then it will invoke the
@value{full_prev}. This command was added for ``usability'' for
VR Programming, it helps reduce the number of voice commands required to use
ELSE. 
@end deffn

@deffn{Interactive Command} else-show-token-names
Display names of all of the Tokens in the current language template set, sort
them alphabetically and display them in a temporary buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn{Interactive Command} else-show-placeholder-names Display names of all of
the Placeholders in the current language template set, sort them alphabetically
and display them in a temporary buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive Command} else-toggle-direction
Command to toggle the custom variable @code{else-direction}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command else-uncomment-placeholders
This command will go through the current buffer looking for placeholders that
have been ``commented out'' using the comment syntax of the current major
mode. The language comment syntax will be removed.
@end deffn

@deffn {Interactive Command} else-wrap-region
``Wrap'' a template around a region of code. Mark the region to be enclosed by
the template and then run this command, it will prompt for the placeholder
name.
@end deffn


@node Using ELSE, Creating and Modifying Templates, Command Summary, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Using ELSE

ELSE has been implemented as a minor mode of Emacs. This means that each buffer
within Emacs may have it own set of language templates enabled, the only limit
is the system resources that is running the editor. So, Emacs may have multiple
language definitions loaded at any one time i.e. the user may be interfacing an
Ada program to a C program and so editing an Ada module in one buffer and a C
file in another buffer, ELSE could be enabled for both buffers and they will
each have the appropriate set of language templates enabled. The following
sections detail how to start up ELSE and use it in the course of normal code
entry.

@menu
* Invoking ELSE::               How to start it up and what you get.
* Navigating::                  
* Expanding Placeholders::      How to expand Placeholders.
* Expanding Tokens::            How to expand Tokens.
* Deleting Placeholders::       
* Preparing for Compilation::   
* Disabling ELSE::              Sometimes you just don't want ELSE to be active.
@end menu

@node Invoking ELSE, Navigating, Using ELSE, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Invoking ELSE

@cindex invoke, invoking

ELSE has been implemented as a minor mode of Emacs, it determines which language
specification to load either from the buffer's major mode or, if it can't locate
an appropriate template file name (@pxref{Building the Language Template File
Name}), then it will prompt the user to enter the template name. For example, if
the major mode for the current buffer is ``C'', then the major mode name will be
``C'' and ELSE will attempt to load the ``C'' template file using the name
``C.lse'' (@pxref{Building the Language Template File Name}). Note that ELSE
will first check if the template file for the major mode is already loaded, if
not then it will search (@pxref{Building the Language Template File Name}) for
the file, if it can't find the file then it will prompt the user to enter a file
name.

After loading the language template file, ELSE will then search for a
``customisation'' file for that particular language. The name of this file is of
the form <language_name>-cust.lse i.e. in the case of loading a template file
for the C language it would look for a customisation file called C-cust.lse
located anywhere in the load path. Refer to @pxref{Customising An Existing
Template Language} for more information on this feature.

To invoke ELSE use the command @code{else-mode}. If the current buffer is empty
then ELSE will insert the @dfn{initial_string} for the language (@pxref{Creating
and Modifying Templates}) and position the cursor within the
placeholder@footnote{The four primary else commands (else-expand-placeholder,
else-next/previous-placeholder and else-kill-placeholder) each check whether
else-mode is enabled and will invoke it automatically if not set}.

@node Navigating, Expanding Placeholders, Invoking ELSE, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Navigating Using ELSE

@cindex navigate
@cindex navigating

Use the @value{full_next} and @value{full_prev} commands to navigate forwards
and backwards through the buffer being edited. These commands will locate the
next/previous valid placeholder and move point into the middle of the
placeholder text. Each command can take a numeric argument, if the desired
number of placeholders are not available, then point will be positioned to the
last/first placeholder in the buffer.

@node Expanding Placeholders, Expanding Tokens, Navigating, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Expanding Placeholders

@cindex expand
@cindex expanding
@cindex expansion of

Placeholders are expanded by positioning the cursor between the @samp{@{@}}'s or
@samp{[]}'s and executing the @value{full_expand} command. If the
placeholder string is a valid placeholder then ELSE will provide one of the
following responses:

@enumerate
@item
Replace the placeholder with a lower level language construct e.g.
@example
[context_clause] @expansion{} with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]
@end example
@item
Provide a choice of possible lower level language constructs via a menu
selection scheme e.g.
@example
[type_declaration] @expansion{} full_type_declaration
                      incomplete_type_declaration
                      private_type_declaration
                      private_extension_declaration
@end example
@item
Provide a prompt to the user that this is the lowest possible expansion and
that the user must type in a replacement string i.e. expansion of the Ada
placeholder @code{@{expression@}} will display the prompt:
@example
Enter an Ada expression as defined in section 4.4 of the LRM,
for example:
4.0, Pi, (1 .. 10 => 0), Integer'Last, Sine(X), not Destroyed
Color'(Blue), 2*Line_count, -4.0 + A, B**2 - 4.0*A*C
@end example
@end enumerate

If a placeholder is followed by ellipses (@dots{}) then ELSE will reproduce the
placeholder automatically as the user either expands or types into a
placeholder. The placeholder may be replicated in either the horizontal (same
line) or vertical direction. The direction of replication (@pxref{Duplication
Specifier}) is determined in the definition of the placeholder.

@node Expanding Tokens, Deleting Placeholders, Expanding Placeholders, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Expanding Tokens

Tokens can best be thought of as a handy abbreviation for a placeholder that
can be expanded e.g. the token @dfn{if}, when expanded, gives the language
construct for the if statement (example taken from the C language templates
but this is a very common token definition) i.e.

@example
@group
if @expansion{} if (@{expression@})
      @{
         @{statement@}@dots{}
      @}
      [else statement]
@end group
@end example

Tokens are most commonly used when the main portion of the code has been
entered and the programmer/user is in the compile/fix-up cycle i.e. the
placeholders have been removed from the source file to make it compilable but
the programmer needs to add further statements. The options available at this
point depends on the scope of the change required, if a major piece of code
needs to be added then it is usually best to manually type in a placeholder
that can be used as a good starting point e.g. [statement]@dots{} is a pretty
common definition in almost any language definition template.

@node Deleting Placeholders, Preparing for Compilation, Expanding Tokens, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Deleting Placeholders

Use the command @value{full_kill} to delete a placeholder
located under point. Note that if the placeholder is a mandatory entry
(enclosed by @samp{@{@}}'s rather than @samp{[]}'s) then ELSE will issue
an error message and ring the bell.

To delete all placeholders in a buffer, use the command
@code{else-cleanup-placeholders}. This command will start at the beginning of
the buffer and delete every placeholder (mandatory or optional) contained in the
buffer. This is a convenient method of performing a ``final'' clean-up after
completing the coding of an program file.

@node Preparing for Compilation, Disabling ELSE, Deleting Placeholders, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Preparing for Compilation

Often a user will wish to compile the current buffer even though code entry has
not been completed. Two commands are provided for convenience during this phase
of coding:

@enumerate
@item
@code{else-comment-placeholders} --- Comment all lines that contain
placeholders, this uses the comment syntax defined by the current major mode. It
uses the Emacs @code{comment-region} command to accomplish this process
@footnote{you definitely want to do this because the typical compiler won't
compile ELSE placeholder templates! But it is a ``nice to have'' because you
might not have finished writing code and thus don't want to lose all of your
placeholders. By using @code{else-uncomment-placeholders} you can quickly
reverse the effect and start coding again.}
@item
@code{else-uncomment-placeholders} --- Uncomment all placeholders in the current
buffer. This command is provided to reverse the effects of the
@code{else-comment-placeholders} command and return the buffer to a state ready
for more code entry by the user.
@end enumerate


@node Disabling ELSE,  , Preparing for Compilation, Using ELSE
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Disabling ELSE

To disable ELSE just type the command `else-mode' to toggle ELSE off. Note that
any template language definitions that have been loaded will remain loaded into
Emacs memory. To explicitly delete a set of language definitions the user must
either stop and re-start the Emacs session or use a DELETE LANGUAGE specifier
(@pxref{Language Identification}) which must be ``compiled'' by ELSE
using the command @value{full_compile} (@pxref{Command Summary}).

@node Creating and Modifying Templates, Custom Variables, Using ELSE, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Creating and Modifying Templates

This section covers the details of how to create and modify language template
definitions. The aim is to give the user a basic understanding, which when
coupled with looking at real template definitions, will allow the creation of
new language templates and the customisation of existing template
definitions.

Commands that are used in this activity are:

@enumerate
@item
@code{else-compile-buffer} --- ``compiles'' ELSE template definitions
from point until the end of the current buffer. When supplied with a
numeric argument (@kbd{C-u}), will compile from the beginning of the
current buffer.
@item
@code{else-extract-all} --- will ``extract'' the definition of the entire
enabled language definition file into the current buffer at point.
@item
@code{else-extract-placeholder}@footnote{These commands provide
``auto-completion'' for the convenience of the user} --- extract the template
definition of a placeholder into the current buffer at point. The command will
prompt the user for the name of the placeholder to extract.
@item
@code{else-extract-token} --- extract the template definition of a token into
the current buffer at point. The command will prompt the user for the name of
the token to extract.
@end enumerate

@menu
* Syntactic Conventions::       
* Customising An Existing Template Language::  
* Extracting Placeholders or Tokens::  
* Create a New Language::       How to create a new language template
* Definition of the Template Structure::  
* Example of Creating A New Language Template::  
@end menu

@node Syntactic Conventions, Customising An Existing Template Language, Creating and Modifying Templates, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  UP
@section Syntactic Conventions for Template Definitions

General syntactic conventions used in a language template file:

@enumerate
@item
Template definitions @b{are not} case sensitive i.e. a placeholder
definition for If_Statement is the same as a definition for
IF_STATEMENT. Also the current version of ELSE expects all ``standard''
template definition strings (such as DEFINE, LANGUAGE etc) to be upper
case. I don't really see any reason to fix this up, it would just slow
down the regular expression searching when the template file is
loaded. The only exception to the case sensitivity rule is that the
language name is case sensitive i.e. if you are defining a new
definition for Emacs-Lisp and call it EMACS-LISP then you will get an
error message to the effect that language Emacs-Lisp doesn't exist!
@item
Enclose text strings that contain embedded spaces with quotes.
@item
Enclose @emph{text strings} to the right of an equal (=) sign in quotes, this
rule does not apply to ``standard'' values such as @code{NONTERMINAL, TERMINAL,
MENU} etc.
@end enumerate

@node Customising An Existing Template Language, Extracting Placeholders or Tokens, Syntactic Conventions, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Customising An Existing Template Language

Probably the first thing you will want to do after the initial exploration of
using ELSE is to start to customise the templates for your own environment and
use. Experience will show that only a small number of templates require
customisation and then it will largely depend upon the ``phase'' in your code
entry i.e. you might find yourself coding a section that has a large number of
`case' constructs and not so many `if' constructs, so rather than have to pass
over the `if' construct in a menu to get to the `case' construct continually,
just customise the @dfn{statement} placeholder so that the `case' construct
occurs before the `if' construct i.e.

@b{Before}:
@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=MENU -

    "null_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "if_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "case_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "loop_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "block_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "accept_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
     .
     .
     .

END DEFINE
@end example

@b{After}:
@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=MENU -

    "case_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "if_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "null_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "loop_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "block_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "accept_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
     .
     .
     .

END DEFINE
@end example


To achieve the above change you would perform the following sequence:

@enumerate
@item
Extract the definition for STATEMENT using the command
@code{else-extract-placeholder} and supplying STATEMENT as the argument;
@item
Edit the definition by swapping the ``if_statement'' and ``case_statement''
lines and moving the ``null_statement'' below the ``if_statement'' line;
@item
``compile'' the new definition by positioning point at the beginning of the
@code{DELETE PLACEHOLDER} line and running the command
@code{else-compile-buffer}.
@end enumerate

Note that you can accomplish the above in any buffer in your Emacs session. The
change will only exist for that edit session unless you either save the changed
template definition (either into the main language template file or the language
custom file).

Note also that the language templates are held as a `global' variable within the
Emacs session, so any changes you make to the template definitions in one buffer
will be in effect for every other buffer that has ELSE mode enabled and that
particular set of language templates selected.

Other reasons for the desire to perform customisation of a set of language
templates also exist. One such is the establishment of a ``global'' set of
common templates across a number of users (usually to help enforce project
coding standards). In this case, each user may want to provide their own
customisations but make sure that they don't impinge on other users. For this
reason, ELSE searches and loads a ``customisation'' language file immediately
after loading the primary language file i.e. loading a language file comprises
two steps, the loading of the <language>.lse file and then the searching and
loading of a customisation file <language>-cust.lse. The customisation file may
be located anywhere in the Emacs load path i.e. it doesn't have to be in the
same directory as the primary template file and can be used to not only provide
new template definitions but also provide ``overrides'' for definitions in the
``global'' language template file. In this manner, we can achieve several goals:

@enumerate
@item 
distribution of a standard language template file which remains constant; and
@item
allow projects and groups to use the same template file.
@end enumerate

and yet still provide the facility to have individual template
characteristics. An example of this is the first release of ELSE contained
language template files that contained file and function headers that had been
customised for previous projects and coding standards that I had worked
on. These definitions went out in the original distribution as an example of how
people could produce such things but neglected the very real problem of
providing a central repository for a standard set of templates for a particular
language. The current language template file distribution have these definitions
extracted from the main template file and <language>-cust.lse files are provided
with these definitions in them. These definitions can then be readily edited
for the particular project the user is working on without incurring
incompatibilities with the central distribution.

The main feature of the ELSE definition language that allows these
customisations to work is the sequence of a template definition where the
placeholder/token is first @b{DELETE'd} and then @b{DEFINE'd} (@pxref{Delete
Placeholder Statement} and @ref{Define Placeholder Statement}). This means that
any existing template definition is wiped and then completely redefined for the
current edit session.

@menu
* Extracting Placeholders or Tokens::          How to extract a placeholder or token
@end menu

@node Extracting Placeholders or Tokens, Create a New Language, Customising An Existing Template Language, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Extracting Placeholders or Tokens

To customise a set of language template definitions you can either edit the
original definition file to make the change permanently or, if you are after
just a temporary change to a definition, you can `extract' the definition into
the current buffer, make your change and then recompile the definition into the
current editing session.

The commands to access the currently loaded language definitions are
@code{else-extract-all}, @code{else-extract-placeholder} or
@code{else-extract-token}. The latter two commands will extract an individual
definition of the type indicated whereas the first command will extract the
entire definition. The process of ``extraction'' will leave the desired
definition in the current buffer at `point'. Note that definition name
completion is available when typing in the name of the definition to
extract. Once the modifications have been made then the definition can be
re-compiled into ELSE using the command @code{else-compile-buffer}
(@xref{Command Summary}.

These changes go into effect at a global level i.e. if there are multiple buffers
loaded with the same language template then they all see the same change.

@node Create a New Language, Definition of the Template Structure, Extracting Placeholders or Tokens, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Creating a New Language

A language template file is best started from a set of EBNF for the target
language. The structure of the language definitions take the form of the
classical inverted tree structure commonly found in computer science
literature i.e. portion of the Ada language template structure looks like:

@example
@group
                             initial string
                                   |
           ---------------------------------------------------------------
           |                        |                        |           |
    library_unit_declaration   library_unit_body       separate_body   @dots{}
           .                        |                        .
           .              ---------------------              .
           .              |                   |              .
                   subprogram_body       package_body

@end group
@end example

Here the placeholder definitions of @code{subprogram_body} and
@code{package_body} expand directly to the language constructs and the user
is then taken to the top of the tree again for the ``lower level'' definitions.

Each template file starts out with a @dfn{language definition} template
(@pxref{Language Definition Template}) (the root of the tree) and then
proceeds into the individual branches using placeholder and token definitions.
Each element of the template syntax is defined and explained in the following
sections. 

@menu
* Language Definition Template::  
* Overriding Language Attributes::  
@end menu

@node Language Definition Template, Overriding Language Attributes, Create a New Language, Create a New Language
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Language Definition Template

The language definition template is (note that the valid identifier characters
are shown here as split across two lines for documentation purposes, this
should not be done in a language definition file)@footnote{Line numbers are
added to aid in the referencing in later sections}:

@example
@group
1  DELETE LANGUAGE "Ada" -
2  DEFINE LANGUAGE "Ada" -
3      /INITIAL_STRING="@{compilation_unit@}@dots{}" -
4      /PUNCTUATION_CHARACTERS=",|;"
5      /SELF_INSERT_CHARACTERS=" `~!@@#$%^&*(),.<>/?;:'[]@{@}=\-+|""
6      /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS="abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEF \
                                     GHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789-"
7      /INDENT_SIZE=2 -
8      /VERSION=1.7

END DEFINE
@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@center Example Language Definition 
@sp 2


@menu
* Language Identification::     
* Initial String::              
* Punctuation characters::      
* Self Insert Characters::      
* Valid Identifier Characters::  
* Indentation Size::            
* Template Version::            
@end menu

@node Language Identification, Initial String, Language Definition Template, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Language Identification

@code{Lineno 1 - 2} --- Any given Emacs session can have multiple source files
loaded, each with their own set of language templates i.e. the user could be
editing a C source file, a C++ source file and an Ada source, ELSE could be
turned on for each buffer. So, language definition files need a mechanism to
uniquely identify the language to which the definition will be applied. A
language definition file always starts out with the same two lines, the
@code{DELETE LANGUAGE @{language name@}}@footnote{Note that language name is
case sensitive i.e. Ada and ADA are two different language names} and
@code{DEFINE LANGUAGE @{language name@}}. Because each ELSE session is
customisable, each template definition construct (@code{LANGUAGE},
@code{PLACEHOLDER} and @code{TOKEN}) includes a @code{DELETE} and @code{DEFINE}
command pair. By using a convention of @code{DELETE} and then @code{DEFINE} we
ensure that the definition being ``replaced'' or changed will be deleted and
then defined anew. Thus to define a new language the following two lines are:

@example
@group
DELETE LANGUAGE "XXX" -
DEFINE LANGUAGE "XXX" -
@end group
@end example

This deletes a complete language definition called ``XXX'' (and all of its
associated placeholder and token definitions) and then commences defining a new
language called ``XXX''.

@node Initial String, Punctuation characters, Language Identification, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Initial String

@code{Lineno 3} --- The specifier @code{/INITIAL_STRING} defines the textual
string to be inserted on the condition that the buffer in which ELSE is being
turned on is empty. When ELSE mode is enabled for a buffer it will make sure the
appropriate set of language definitions are loaded and then check if the buffer
is empty, if the buffer is empty then the text string defined by this specifier
will be inserted into the buffer. This text string is usually the template that
appears at the top of the language definition tree
i.e. @code{@{compilation_unit@}}.

@node Punctuation characters, Self Insert Characters, Initial String, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Punctuation characters

@code{Lineno 4} --- The specifier @code{/PUNCTUATION_CHARACTERS} defines the
punctuation characters for the language being defined. This affects how the
@dfn{housekeeping} efforts of ELSE work. It helps the code determine where
whitespace should or should not occur. e.g. when deleting the optional
placeholder for the parameters of the following procedure specification:

@example
  procedure TEST [formal_part];
@end example

then we want the following:
@example
  procedure TEST;
@end example
rather than:
@example
  procedure TEST ;
@end example
In this example, the function @value{full_kill} command noticed that the `;'
character is defined as a punctuation character by the Ada Language Definition
and thus it should ensure that no whitespace exists between the punctuation
character and the preceeding function name.

@node Self Insert Characters, Valid Identifier Characters, Punctuation characters, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Self Insert Characters

@code{Lineno 5} --- When the user inserts keystrokes into an ELSE enabled buffer
the code has to check if the cursor is within an placeholder, if it is then the
desired behaviour is for ELSE to automatically delete the placeholder and
replace it with the keypresses that are coming from the keyboard. The strings
defined by @code{/SELF_INSERT_CHARACTERS} and
@code{/VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS} are both used for this purpose.

@node Valid Identifier Characters, Indentation Size, Self Insert Characters, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Valid Identifier Characters

@code{Lineno 6} --- This attribute is used during token searches to allow ELSE
to correctly identify the text string that the user may be attempting to
expand. When the user runs @value{full_expand} ELSE ``compiles'' the string
specified by the /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS attribute into the following Elisp
regular expression: 

@example
[^%s+]
@end example

where the ``%s'' is replaced by the text string
/VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS. This regular expression means ``search for any
character which is not in the range of characters''. The entire string between
``point'' (current cursor location) and the character found by this search is
taken to be the text of the token the user is requesting an expansion for.

Since this search uses Emacs regular expression syntax, care needs to be
exercised in the text actually placed in the /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS
attribute. If the user wishes to alter this attribute, they are advised to
become familiar with Emacs regular expression syntax prior to attempting any
changes. 

As an example, the following situation is put --- the user wants to modify a set
of language templates so that they can use a token consisting of the character
sequence ``?:'' (the ``C'' ternary operator could be generated this way). Just
creating a token with a name of ``?:'' will not work as the two characters will
not be part of the /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS set and therefore attempting to
``expand'' the string ``?:'' would fail to find a valid string to search the
token database with. 

So the logical first cut by the unwary would be to add these characters at the
end of the existing string attribute for /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS thusly:

@example
      /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS="abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEF \
                                    GHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789-?:"
@end example

However, since this string is used as a regular expression, the character
sequence ``9-?'' will be interpreted as ``all characters in the range from 9 to
?'' rather than as the user intended i.e. the individual characters ``9'',
``-'', ``?'' and ``:''. The ``correct'' place to add the sequence ``?:'' would
be anywhere in the string @emph{other than} at the end of the
/VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS string i.e. this would be the correct method of
implementing this change:

@example
      /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS="abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEF \
                                    GHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789?:-"
@end example

In fact, it might be better for template maintainers to make the treatment of
/VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS more ``obvious'' by using something like this:

@example
      /VALID_IDENTIFIER_CHARACTERS="a-zA-Z_0-9-"
@end example

If a ``user'' was faced with modifying this, they might be tempted to read
further?


@node Indentation Size, Template Version, Valid Identifier Characters, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Indentation Size
@code{Lineno 7} --- The line
@example
  /INDENT_SIZE=2 -
@end example

allows customisation of the identation of the code generated using ELSE. This
attribute allows the user to specify the indentation of each line of the
template. It provides a single point for the user to change the indentation of
the code generated by ELSE (previous versions of ELSE did not contain this
feature and thus, if your coding standard required indention differently to that
specified by the standard base template, then you would have to edit the entire
template file and change all indented lines to the level required by your coding
standard). 

As ELSE loads and scans the template definition file it determines a
``normalised'' value for the indentation of each line within each definition by
making the first line that shows an indentation (leading space(s)) from the
first line of the definition. If subsequent lines show indentation which is
greater that the ``normalised'' value then it is assigned a further multiple of
the INDENT_SIZE. This continues for the scanning of the definition and the
indentation of each line is stored by ELSE. When ELSE is asked to insert the
text lines for a definition then it multiples each indentation value by the
value specified by INDENT_SIZE i.e. as an example, the text definition of a
switch statement might be:

@example
    "switch (@{expression@}) @{"
    "   [case_part]..."
    "      [default_part]"
    "@}"
@end example

Here we see at line 2 that we have an indentation of 3 spaces --- this value is
calculated as a value of indentation of 1 times the value contained in
INDENT_SIZE. When line 3 is scanned, ELSE notes that it is further indented and
assigns a value of 2 to that line. When line 4 is scanned ELSE notes that it has
no indentation compared with line 1 and is assigned an indentation level of 0 to
that line.

When ELSE inserts this definition, it will take the indentation value of each
line (0 for lines 1 and 4, 1 for line 2, 2 for line 3) and insert the number of
spaces determined by the indentation level multipled by the value of
INDENT_SIZE. Thus line 0 would be inserted with no extra spaces, line 1 would
have 2 spaces inserted, line 3 would have 4 spaces inserted and line 4 would
have 0 spaces inserted e.g.

@example
switch (@{expression@}) @{
  [case_part]...
    [default_part]
@}
@end example

To change the indentation of lines in ELSE, all the user has to do is change the
value of /INDENT_SIZE and ``recompile'' the language template definition file.

Note that if there is no indentation size specified then a default
value of 4 will be assumed. ELSE will produce a message when compiling
a language that contains no indentation size attribute specifier.

Where the user might want to override the spacing of templates as they are
scanned by ELSE i.e. textual headers for functions/files might be an
example. ELSE has the facility of allowing ``hard'' spaces to be inserted at the
beginning of each line of a definition. These hard spaces are indicated by a '@@'
character i.e. 

@smallexample
DELETE PLACEHOLDER MODULE_LEVEL_COMMENTS -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER MODULE_LEVEL_COMMENTS -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -
    
    "/*  ===[ @{module@} ]=============================================//"
    ""              
    "@@Description: @{text@}"
    ""                     
    "@@Revisions:"         
    ""                     
    "@@@@REV     DATE      BY       DESCRIPTION"
    "@@------  ---------   ---      ---------------------------------//"
    ""                                          
    "@@--------------------------------------------------------------//"
    ""                                          
    "@@@@This item is the property of ResMed Ltd, and contains confid//"
    "@@@@secret information. It may not be transfered from the custod//"
    "@@@@ResMed except as authorised in writing by an officer of ResM//"
    "@@@@item nor the information it contains may be used, transfered//"
    "@@@@published, or disclosed, in whole or in part, and directly o//"
    "@@@@except as expressly authorised by an officer of ResMed, purs//"
    "@@@@agreement."
    ""              
    "@@@@Copyright (c) 2002 ResMed Ltd.  All rights reserved."   
    "@@==============================================================//"
    ""

END DEFINE
@end smallexample

@node Template Version,  , Indentation Size, Language Definition Template
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Template Version
@code{Lineno 8} --- The line
@example
  /VERSION=1.7 -
@end example

indicates what version this particular language template file is. This is a
better solution to placing version labels in the comments portion of language
template files as if a user decides to ``extract'' the entire language set then
any comment headers are lost --- this attribute allows people to see what
version of the template file was used as the base when the language template set
was compiled.

@node Overriding Language Attributes,  , Language Definition Template, Create a New Language
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Overriding Language Attributes

You can ``override'' any of the attributes of a language (attributes have been
described above) by providing a single @code{DEFINE LANGUAGE} statement without
the (normally) preceding @code{DELETE LANGUAGE} statement. Just include the
attribute that you wish to ``override'' and the new value will take effect when
you ``compile'' the new language definition. Currently this feature of ELSE is
only really useful for the @code{/INDENT_SIZE} attribute i.e. the baseline
language file may define a value that is not appropriate for your project so you
can redefine it to some other value by placing a @code{DEFINE LANGUAGE}
statement in the <lang>-cust.lse file. For example, the following will re-define
the indentation size of C Language template definitions to be 4 spaces:

@example
@group

DEFINE LANGUAGE C - 
    /INDENT_SIZE=4 -

END DEFINE

@end group
@end example

When ELSE meets such a situation it will issue a ``warning'' message
i.e. ``Language XXX exists, assuming attribute modification''. 

@node Definition of the Template Structure, Example of Creating A New Language Template, Create a New Language, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Definition of the Template Structure

The remainder of the language definition file may contain a mixture of
placeholder and token definitions. The order in which they appear is not
important as no attempts are made at cross checking definitions and their use
whilst the language definition file is being loaded. Perhaps one day there will
be an explicit command to aid template developers to check for ``holes'' by
performing a consistency check.

@menu
* Placeholders::                
* Tokens::                      
* Hooking Elisp Code into ELSE Templates::  
@end menu

@node Placeholders, Tokens, Definition of the Template Structure, Definition of the Template Structure
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Placeholder Definition

A typical placeholder definition is shown below. Note that the line numbers are
added as an aid in the following sections that explain each portion of this
structure. Each section will reference the appropriate section by use of a line
number. Texinfo doesn't seem to offer appropriate x-referencing in this area, so
each section will just mention @code{Lineno: X}.

@example
@group
1  DELETE PLACEHOLDER IF_STATEMENT -
2      /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
3  DEFINE PLACEHOLDER IF_STATEMENT -
4      /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
5      /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
6      /SUBSTITUTE_COUNT=2 -
7      /DESCRIPTION="" -
8      /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
9      /SEPARATOR="" -
10     /TYPE=NONTERMINAL
11 
12     "if @{condition@} then"
13     "  @{statement@}@dots{}"
14     "[elsif_part]"
15     "[else_part]"
16     "end if;"
17
18 END DEFINE
@end group
@end example

The following sections explain each construct used in this definition.

@menu
* Delete Placeholder Statement::  
* Language Specifier::          
* Define Placeholder Statement::  
* Auto Text Substitute::        
* Description Specifier::       
* Duplication Specifier::       
* Separator Specification::     
* Type Specifier::              
* Template Body::               
* Placeholder Cross-Referencing::  
* End Define Command::          
@end menu

@node Delete Placeholder Statement, Language Specifier, Placeholders, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Delete Placeholder Statement

@code{Lineno 1} --- This statement tells ELSE to delete a placeholder
called @code{IF_STATEMENT} from the language template definitions for
the language "Ada" (as defined in the next line --- @pxref{Language
Specifier}).  The placeholder name may be any combination of
characters between the range of SPC to ~.  If the name contains one or
more spaces, then it must be wholly enclosed by quotation marks.

@node Language Specifier, Define Placeholder Statement, Delete Placeholder Statement, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Language Specifier

@code{Lineno 2 & 4} --- The language specifier @code{/LANGUAGE="Ada"} defines the
particular language set to which the preceeding template command applies. This
line must follow the commands @code{DEFINE PLACEHOLDER} or @code{DELETE
PLACEHOLDER}.

@node Define Placeholder Statement, Auto Text Substitute, Language Specifier, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Define Placeholder Statement

@code{Lineno 3} --- This statement tells ELSE to define a placeholder called
@code{IF_STATEMENT} from the language definition identifier in the next line
(@pxref{Language Specifier}). The placeholder name may be any legal combination
of the following characters:

@code{A-Z 0-9_}

If the name contains embedded spaces then it must be enclosed by quotation
marks.

@node Auto Text Substitute, Description Specifier, Define Placeholder Statement, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Auto Text Substitute

@code{Lineno 5 --- Lineno 6} --- The attribute on Lineno 5 has two possible
values: @code{/AUTO_SUBSTITUTE} or @code{/NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE}. It works in
conjunction with count specified by the attribute on Lineno 6. This attribute
exists because it is quite common in many languages (or coding styles) to repeat
a text string multiple times within a language construct e.g. in Ada the package
name (@code{designator}) is an optional entry at the end of the package body:

@example
@group
1 package body @{designator@} is
2    @{declarative_item@}@dots{}
3 [begin_package_body]
4 end [designator];
@end group
@end example

In the above example, it would be desirable if the second occurrence of the
@dfn{designator} string, shown at lineno 4, could be replaced with the text of
the first @dfn{designator} string (lineno 1) as the user types it into the
buffer. To achieve this behaviour in ELSE, the definition of the
@dfn{designator} placeholder would have the auto-substitute attribute set and
the substitution count attribute set as follows:

@example
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER DESIGNATOR -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER DESIGNATOR -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /AUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /SUBSTITUTE_COUNT=2 -
    .
    .
    .

END DEFINE
@end group
@end example

The general behaviour of ELSE is that whenever the user starts to enter text
whilst positioned within a placeholder, ELSE will examine the auto-substitute
attribute for that placeholder and if it is set to @code{AUTO_SUBSTITUTE} it
will then search forward in the buffer looking for @code{SUBSTITUTE_COUNT}
matches of the placeholder string. Each matching portion of the buffer is tagged
using Emacs markers, then as the user types in the text string at the first
placeholder, the same text (including backspaces etc) is repeated at each of the
subsequent matching sites. The duplication of changes to the subsequent textual
areas continues until the user makes a change to the buffer that is outside the
area of the original placeholder. Once such a change occurs then all
auto-substitution makers are erased. 

The default value for the @code{/SUBSTITUTE_COUNT} attribute is 1 i.e. there
will be one other place to perform a substitution. 

The following example shows an interesting example of the use of the
auto-substitute feature in the C language to create a ``custom'' placeholder
definition for the for loop i.e. it is quite common to have a for loop where the
count variable is repeated at three different points in the same line. By
defining a special placeholder name with an auto-substitute count set
appropriately then we can save some typing i.e.

@example
DELETE TOKEN FOR -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
DEFINE TOKEN FOR -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
    /DESCRIPTION="conditional, repeated statement execution"

    "for (@{loop_var@} = [0]; @{loop_var@} [<] @{value@}; @{loop_var@}[++])"
    "@{"
    "   @{statement@}..."
    "@}"

END DEFINE

DELETE PLACEHOLDER LOOP_VAR -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER LOOP_VAR -
    /LANGUAGE="C" -
    /AUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /SUBSTITUTE_COUNT=2 -
    /DESCRIPTION="" -
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=TERMINAL

    "Enter a variable name."

END DEFINE
@end example

Here, the @dfn{loop_var} placeholder is defined to auto-substitute with 2 further
occurrences. As the user types into the first occurrence of the placeholder then
that text will be repeated twice more.

Note that if the placeholder definition specifies a repeat count but that number
of matches cannot be found at run-time then only the placeholders that were
matched will have the substitution performed.

Another thing to note about this example, is that it shows a for loop definition
with some ``common'' options i.e. the initial value is defined as a placeholder
with a value of `0' when expanded, the loop test is defined with a default of
'<' and the loop counter is defined with a default value of increment
i.e. `++'. Since all three of these items are defined as placeholders, the user
has the option of navigating between them and either selecting the default value
or typing in a new value.

@node Description Specifier, Duplication Specifier, Auto Text Substitute, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Description Specifier

@code{Lineno 7} --- This specifier defines a text string which will appear with
the placeholder if it is referenced from a menu item. This acts as a one line
help string for the user in menu displays. An empty description is defined by
@dfn{""}.

@node Duplication Specifier, Separator Specification, Description Specifier, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Duplication Specifier
@code{Lineno 8} --- This specifier is used to define how the template will be
duplicated if the ellipses are found after the placeholder text in the buffer
i.e. @code{[statement]@dots{}} tells ELSE to keep repeating the placeholder
@code{[statement]} whenever the user expands (or types into) it. The possible
values are:

@enumerate
@item
VERTICAL --- the placeholder is duplicated vertically onto the next line.
@item
HORIZONTAL --- the placeholder is duplicated on the same line to the right of
the placeholder being expanded.
@item
CONTEXT_DEPENDENT --- means the placeholder will be duplicated in either
the vertical or horizontal direction. Some simple rules are applied in this
case, if the placeholder is alone on the line then it is duplicated
vertically, if there is text on the same line before the placeholder then it
will be duplicated in the horizontal e.g.

@example
@group
[statement]@dots{} @expansion{} if @{condition@} then
                    @{statement@}@dots{}
                  [elsif_part]
                  [else_part]
                  end if;
                  [statement]@dots{}
@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@center Example of Vertical Duplication
@sp 3

@example
@group

when @{discrete_choice@}@dots{} => @expansion{} when RED | [discrete_choice]@dots{} =>

@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@center Example of Horizontal Duplication
@sp 3
@end enumerate

@node Separator Specification, Type Specifier, Duplication Specifier, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Separator Specification

@code{Lineno 9} --- The specifier @code{/SEPARATOR} is used to indicate the
characters that should be inserted automatically when the placeholder is
duplicated e.g. Ada uses the `|' character as a logical `or' symbol when
multiple conditions are applicable in a case statement, so when each occurrence
of the placeholder is expanded then ELSE automatically inserts the character(s)
defined by this specifier as part of the placeholder duplication e.g. the
placeholder definition for @dfn{discrete_choice} is:

@example
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER DISCRETE_CHOICE -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER DISCRETE_CHOICE -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION="" -
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR=" | "
    /TYPE=MENU

    "expression"/PLACEHOLDER
    "discrete_range"/PLACEHOLDER
    "others"

END DEFINE
@end group
@end example

and the expansion would be:

@example
@group
when @{discrete_choice@}@dots{} => @expansion{} when RED | [discrete_choice]@dots{} =>

@end group
@end example

Note that the separator characters, @code{" | "} were automatically inserted
before the placeholder was repeated. ELSE also uses the character(s) defined
by the @code{/SEPARATOR} specifier when killing an unwanted placeholder e.g.

@example
@group
when RED | [discrete_choice]@dots{} => @expansion{} when RED =>
@end group
@end example

@node Type Specifier, Template Body, Separator Specification, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Type Specifier

@code{Lineno 10} --- The specifier @code{/TYPE} informs ELSE how to treat the
expansion of the placeholder. This specifier can have three possible values:

@enumerate
@item
TERMINAL --- This is the ``end of the line'', no further expansions are defined
and the text string(s) held in the body of the definition are to be used as a
prompter to the user e.g. with the following definition for @dfn{identifier}
placeholder

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER IDENTIFIER -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER IDENTIFIER -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION="" -
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=TERMINAL

    "Any Ada identifier will do"

END DEFINE

@end example

An expansion of this placeholder will provide the prompt of @code{Any Ada
identifier will do} to the user. The prompt is displayed for a customisable
period (@pxref{Custom Variables}) in seconds and then erased from the
screen. Note that is the user performs any entry during the display of the
prompt string then the prompt buffer will be terminated immediately and the user
input actioned.

@item
NONTERMINAL --- informs ELSE that the body of the placeholder definition
contains one or more text strings which should be used to replace the
placeholder ie. the following definition will provide this expansion
@example
[context_clause] @expansion{} with @{library_unit_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]

@end example

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER CONTEXT_CLAUSE -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER CONTEXT_CLAUSE -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

    "with @{unit_simple_name@}@dots{}; [use_clause]"

END DEFINE
@end example
@item
MENU --- informs ELSE that the body of the placeholder definition contains a
menu selection that must be presented to the user for resolution i.e. the
following definition will present a menu of choices for the @code{statement}
placeholder:
@example

DELETE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=VERTICAL -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=MENU -

    "assignment_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "if_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "case_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "loop_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "block_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    .
    .
    .
    "select_statement"/PLACEHOLDER

END DEFINE
@end example
@end enumerate


@node Template Body, Placeholder Cross-Referencing, Type Specifier, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Template Body

@code{Lineno 12 - 16} --- The ``body'' of the template definition may contain one
or more text strings. These text strings will be used by ELSE according to the
setting of the @code{/TYPE} specifier (@pxref{Type Specifier} for examples).

When the placeholder body is a menu then each text line may contain optional
keywords. These keywords are:

@enumerate
@item
@code{/PLACEHOLDER} --- informs ELSE that the preceding text is the name of a
placeholder.
@item
@code{/TOKEN} --- informs ELSE that the preceding text is the name of a token.
@item
@code{/FOLLOW} --- informs ELSE that if the line item is a placeholder, that is
itself a menu, then incorporate the entries of that definition into the menu
display@footnote{This is default behaviour for ELSE}. The default for a line
item in a menu template definition is @code{FOLLOW} and so this attribute may be
omitted. To explicitly override this behavour for individual instances use the
@code{/NOFOLLOW} option as documented below.
@item
@code{/NOFOLLOW} --- informs ELSE that even though the line item is a
placeholder, that is itself a menu, do not ``follow'' the definition by
incorporating the entries of that definition into the menu display. Note that
this option can be globally overriden by the @code{'else-follow-menus} and
@code{'else-nofollow-menus} flags (@xref{Custom Variables}.)
@end enumerate

For example, the @code{FULL_TYPE_DECLARATION} placeholder in the Ada
language templates has a body of:

@example
@group
    "type @{identifier@} [known_discriminant_part] is @{type_definition@};"
    "task_type_declaration"/PLACEHOLDER
    "protected_type_declaration"/PLACEHOLDER
@end group
@end example

This body tells ELSE that if the user selects the first line, then perform a
direct text substitution, if one of the other two lines are selected then ELSE
is being told that they refer to a further placeholder and will be treated
according to the @code{/TYPE} specifier of that placeholder i.e. the indicated
placeholder will be expanded.  See also @xref{Indentation Size}, for further
information on applying ``hard'' spaces to the beginning of a line of text in
the body.

An example of the use of the @code{FOLLOW} and @code{NOFOLLOW} is taken from the
Emacs-Lisp template file for the definition of the @code{STATEMENT}
placeholder@footnote{The entry for @code{property-list-stmt} has been modified
for the purposes of this example}:

@example
    "let_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    "if_statement"/PLACEHOLDER
    .
    .
    .
    "property-list-stmt"/PLACEHOLDER
    "symbols"/PLACEHOLDER/NOFOLLOW
    "sequences"/PLACEHOLDER/NOFOLLOW
    .
    .

@end example

Here the placeholder @code{property-list-stmt} is a menu which in turn has
multiple entries/options. If @code{else-follow-menus} is @code{nil}, then ELSE
will ``follow'' the menu definitions for @code{property-list-stmt} and include
its items in the menu display, however, because @code{symbols} is followed by
@code{/NOFOLLOW} then its definitions will not be included in the primary menu
dispolay i.e. if the user wishes to select one of the options in the
@code{symbols} placeholder then they must explicity select the @code{symbols}
entry to be presented with the possible options at that level.

@node Placeholder Cross-Referencing, End Define Command, Template Body, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection Placeholder Cross-Referencing

Finally, the ``body'' of a placeholder definition may contain some or none of
the above attributes and purely reference another existing placeholder i.e.

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER XYZ -
  /LANGUAGE="ABC"
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER XYZ -
  /LANGUAGE="ABC"
  /PLACEHOLDER=DEF

END DEFINE
@end example

Here we have a placeholder called ``XYZ'' which will automatically use the
definition of the placeholder ``DEF'' when it is referenced or invoked by the
ELSE routines. This can be extremely useful in situations such as the following
where the EBNF for a language might specify two forms of ``identifier'' which
you wish to ideally make the same w.r.t ELSE behaviour e.g. when the user enters
a string for @code{subprogram_identifier} ELSE should perform an
auto-substitution on the following @code{defining_identifier} placeholder. 

@example
   procedure @{subprogram_identifier@} is
      ...
   end [defining_identifier];
@end example

We may not want to necessarily change the template definition to generate:

@example
   procedure @{defining_identifier@} is
      ...
   end [defining_identifier];
@end example

and then have to define a placeholder definition for @code{defining_identifier}
that includes auto-substitution behaviour, because @code{defining_identifier}
may appear somewhere else as a ``singleton''. The ideal would be to have a
placeholder definition for @code{subprogram_identifier} that defined
auto-substitute behaviour but also referred to the definition of
@code{defining_identifier} for its basic behaviour i.e. if we use the following
definition then when the user types in a @code{subprogram_identifier}
placeholder ELSE will search for a matching @code{defining_identifier}
placeholder and perform auto-substitution there:

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER SUBPROGRAM_IDENTIFIER -
  /LANGUAGE="ABC"
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER SUBPROGRAM_IDENTIFIER -
  /LANGUAGE="ABC"
  /AUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
  /PLACEHOLDER=DEFINING_IDENTIFIER 

END DEFINE
@end example


@node End Define Command,  , Placeholder Cross-Referencing, Placeholders
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection End Define Command

@code{Lineno 18} --- The @code{END DEFINE} specifier informs ELSE that the end of
a placeholder or token definition has occurred.

@node Tokens, Hooking Elisp Code into ELSE Templates, Placeholders, Definition of the Template Structure
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Token Definition

There are only two forms to the definition of a Token, they are both shown
below. These two definitions show two different ways of specifying the same
thing. In the first instance, the definition is using an existing placeholder
definition and just referring to it as the action to perform on expansion. The
second form shows a textual substitution form which acts in the same manner as a
@code{NONTERMINAL} placeholder (@pxref{Type Specifier}).
@example
DELETE TOKEN IF -                   DELETE TOKEN IF -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -                   /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE TOKEN IF -                   DEFINE TOKEN IF -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -                   /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /PLACEHOLDER=IF_STATEMENT
                                        "if @{condition@} then"
END DEFINE                              "  @{statement@}@dots{}"
                                        "[elsif_part]"
                                        "[else_part]"
                                        "end if;"
                                    END DEFINE
@end example

The @code{DELETE} and @code{DEFINE} lines follow the same rules as for the
equivalent placeholder specifiers (@pxref{Delete Placeholder Statement}) and
(@pxref{Define Placeholder Statement}. Similarly for the @code{LANGUAGE}
specifier (@pxref{Language Specifier}.

The greatest strength of the token definition is that it provides convenient
``abbreviations'' for the user i.e. the user doesn't have to type out the full
placeholder name and enclose it in braces. Tokens provide the facility of a
convenient stand alone string which can be expanded into some other entity,
either another placeholder definition or as a textual string. Note that token
definitions do not provide ``non-terminal'' and ``menu'' facilities like the
placeholder definition however, this is off-set by the ability of the token
definition to refer to a placeholder definition which does provide these
facilities. 

Of special note, ELSE searches the appropriate definition array based upon the
context of the string being expanded i.e. if the string is enclosed in
@samp{@{@}}'s or @samp{[]}'s then it will search the placeholder array, if the
string is ``free-standing'' then ELSE will search the token array. Thus,
template definition names do not have to be unique between placeholders
definitions and token definitions e.g. you could have a placeholder definition
called ``if'' and a token definition called ``if'' without having any conflict.

@node Hooking Elisp Code into ELSE Templates,  , Tokens, Definition of the Template Structure
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Hooking Elisp Code into ELSE Templates
On rare occasions it might be useful to associate some Elisp code with ELSE
templating activities. This can be ``linked'' to both placeholder and token
definitions using the same syntax (the following examples show usage with
placeholder definitions but the same syntax applies equally to token
definitions). The syntax is:

@example

    /RUN_CODE=<elisp-defun><phase>

@end example

where @dfn{elisp-defun} is the name of a Elisp defun and @dfn{phase} is the
``phase'' of operation during which ELSE will call the defun. The
currently@footnote{Other possibilties are /ON_ENTRY and /ON_EXIT i.e. calling
defuns as ELSE moves point into or out of a placeholder --- if there is demand
for these ``phases'' I will implement them} defined ``phases'' are:

@itemize
@item 
/BEFORE --- Call @code{elisp-defun} @dfn{before} the placeholder/token is
expanded (invoked during execution of @value{full_expand});
@item
/AFTER -- Call @code{elisp-defun} @dfn{after} the placeholder/token has been
expanded (invoked during execution of @value{full_expand});
@item
/ONINSERT --- Call @code{elisp-defun} when a @dfn{self-insert} character is
typed with point in the placeholder (this phase option is meaningless for
tokens).

@end itemize

A definition (placeholder or token) may have multiple @code{/RUN_CODE} lines
indicating a separate elisp-defun to call for each line. Each @code{/RUN_CODE}
line may have only one elisp-defun but can have multiple phase indicators
i.e. the following example would have @dfn{elisp-test-dfn} called during both
the @code{/BEFORE} and @code{/AFTER} phases of the expansion.

@example
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER XXXX - 
   /LANGUAGE="yyy" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER XXXX - 
   /LANGUAGE="yyy" -
   .
   .
   /RUN_CODE=else-test-dfn/BEFORE/AFTER
   .

END DEFINE
@end group
@end example

A more concrete example is shown using a definition found in the ELSE template
language itself (Template.lse). The definition for placeholder
``nonterminal|terminal_placeholder'' is (partially shown for brevity):

@smallexample
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER nonterminal|terminal_placeholder -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER nonterminal|terminal_placeholder -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
    .
    .
    
    "    /@{substitute@}"
    "    [substitute_count]"
    "    /DESCRIPTION=@{descriptive_text@} -"
    .
    .

END DEFINE
@end group
@end smallexample

The ``{substitute}'' placeholder is a menu that leads to either
@code{/NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE} or @code{/AUTO_SUBSTITUTE} --- however, if the user
selects @code{/NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE} then they have to manually delete the
redundant placeholder ``[substitute_count]''. A possible solution (this can be
solved with slightly different ELSE template definitions, BTW) is to use the
@code{/RUN_CODE} attribute and accompany it with an appropriate elisp defun. In
this scenario, the definition of ``substitute'' changes from:

@smallexample
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER SUBSTITUTE -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER SUBSTITUTE -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
    .
    .
    /TYPE=MENU -
    
    "NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -"
    "AUTO_SUBSTITUTE -"

END DEFINE
@end group
@end smallexample

to this (incorporating the run-time attribute):

@smallexample
@group
DELETE PLACEHOLDER SUBSTITUTE -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER SUBSTITUTE -
    /LANGUAGE="Template" -
    .
    .
    /RUN_CODE=process-substitute/AFTER
    /TYPE=MENU -
    
    "NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -"
    "AUTO_SUBSTITUTE -"

END DEFINE
@end group
@end smallexample

and the user ``compiles'' the following elisp defun into their edit session
(place in a convenient .el file that gets loaded, your .emacs file or whatever): 

@smallexample
@group
(defun process-substitute ()
  "Determine whether the next placeholder after a [substitute] should
be deleted or left intact - could make this more 'robust' by testing
whether the placeholder is a [substitute_count] before deleting......"
  (let ()
    (if (else-scan-for-match "/NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE" nil t)
        (progn
          (else-next-placeholder)
          (else-delete-placeholder)))))
@end group
@end smallexample

Now when ``@code{@{substitute@}}'' is expanded, the Elisp defun
@code{process-substitute} is run @dfn{after} the expansion and decides whether
the ``@code{[substitute_count]}'' placeholder remains or not depending upon
which option the user selected.

Note that this example relies on ``published'' ELSE defuns
(@code{else-next-placeholder} and @code{else-delete-placeholder}) and an
``unpublished'' defun @code{else-scan-for-match}. The later is used to scan the
text before point (search limited to the beginning of the line in this case) and
look for the text @code{/NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE} --- if it is found then the
``@code{[substitute_count]}'' is not wanted and is deleted.


@node Example of Creating A New Language Template,  , Definition of the Template Structure, Creating and Modifying Templates
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Example of Creating A New Language Template

Use of ELSE shines for ``verbose'', structured languages such as Ada, Modula-2,
Pascal etc and performs not so well for what I will call unstructured
``minimalist'' languages such as C and C++. Obviously, the aim in the
definition of languages such as Modula-2, Pascal etc was to provide code that
was more readable and therefore easier to check and maintain. Languages such as
C and C++ were designed (C++, due to its desire to be backward compatible with
C) for minimal code entry effort which results in code with minimal
readability and therefore maintainability.

When creating language templates it is important to keep in mind that there is
a point where the trade-off of template availability versus user effort is
reached i.e. even for ``verbose'' languages, I would not recommend providing
templates for the ``expression'' construct. It is easier to just provide a
prompt string at this point rather than to follow the path that the language
syntax lays out, because at this stage the user is only required to type in
something like @code{A = B} or something equally simple. Remember the aim of
ELSE is to reduce keystrokes and improve productivity, so providing templates
that allow the user to select from the many permutations that lead from a
typical language ``expression'' syntax is not warranted either on your part of
template design or on the users part of code entry.

If you are faced with developing a set of language templates then there are two
possible courses of action. You can either establish a bare minimum of
constructs that will suit your needs i.e. template definitions for the common
language constructs such as ``statement'', ``if statement'', ``case
statement'', ``procedure or function statement'' etc or you can go the ``whole
hog'' and provide a ``complete'' set of templates right down to definitions for
common library calls etc.

One of the benefits of the ``bare minimum'' approach is that you can cater for
the large portion of code entry with only a couple of hours work to develop the
template definitions. Whereas if you opt for the ``whole hog'' approach then it
may involve quite a few hours work. Creation of language template definitions
is a very manual, mechanical task and is not always easy since you are usually
working from a specification for the language such as a set syntax
diagrams. Such syntax diagrams are rarely suitable for straight incorporation
into a set of language template definitions. There is usually a fair amount of
manually going through the syntax looking for simplifications etc.

If you are going for the complete approach then you are advised to start from a
set of EBNF syntax diagrams for the language. To relieve the amount of work
required for this approach, I have written a program that helps enormously in
the effort of going from the EBNF to the language definition file. This program
is available upon request, just email me and I will send you the latest copy
(its comes in binary form because I am too embarrassed to release it, it was my
very first effort at using both literate programming and C++ :-), perhaps one
day I will re-do it based upon experiences learnt). The program is available
for Win95 platforms only.

The following attempts to provide some definition of the EBNF structure and
examples with accompanying language template definitions. EBNF syntax diagrams
are useful because they can be used to determine when a particular construct
should be optional, mandatory, whether it should auto-repeat and whether there
are any ``punctuation'' strings required.

It was somewhat difficult to run down a definition of EBNF syntax, hopefully
the following is accurate, please provide corrections if I am wrong :-).

In EBNF the following rules apply:
@enumerate
@item 
Square brackets enclose optional items, thus the two following rules are equivalent.
@example
   return_statement ::= return [expression];
   return_statement ::= return; | return expression;
@end example
@item 
Curly braces enclose a repeated item. The item may appear zero or more
times, the repetitions occur from left to right as with an equivalent
left-recursive rule. Thus the two following rules are equivalent:
@example
   term ::= factor @{multiplying_operator factor@}
   term ::= factor | term multiplying_operator factor
@end example
@item 
A vertical line separates alternative items unless it occurs immediately
after an opening curly bracket, in which case it stands for itself:
@example
   constraint ::= scalar_constraint | composite_constraint
   discrete_choice_list ::= discrete_choice @{| discrete_choice@}
@end example
@item 
Items that repeat are enclosed within braces, any character that appears
after the opening curly brace defines a ``separator'' string ie. a string that
appears between each occurrence of the repeating construct (refer to example in
previous item)
@end enumerate

It is important to note in the following examples, that the keywords of the
language being converted are copied verbatim into the language template
definition, any other text is converted to either a mandatory or optional
placeholder depending on how the EBNF defines their usage. Examples that
illustrate these points are shown below. The EBNF construct is shown first
followed by the equivalent ELSE template definition.

@example

return_statement ::= return [expression];

DELETE PLACEHOLDER RETURN_STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER RETURN_STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

    "return [expression];"

END DEFINE
@end example
@example
    sequence_of_statements ::= statement @{statement@}

DELETE PLACEHOLDER SEQUENCE_OF_STATEMENTS -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER SEQUENCE_OF_STATEMENTS -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=VERTICAL -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

    "@{statement@}@dots{}"

END DEFINE

@end example
This example shows the definition of an item that appears zero or more time,
because a typical language syntax demands at least one occurrence of a
@code{statement} the EBNF shows a single instance (the mandatory single
instance) followed by the instance enclosed in curly braces which is specified
as repeating ``zero or more times''. Thus we ``code'' the template definition
as single item enclosed by curly braces (which in ELSE means a mandatory
entry). Remember that the @dots{} denote auto-repeat, so when the placeholder
is repeated it will be enclosed by square brackets and will thus be an optional
entry. Thus we achieve the original intent of the ENBF.

In practice, you would not define the construct @code{sequence_of_statements}
as it appears by itself and is used in other constructs such as:
@example
    if_statement ::=  if condition then
                        sequence_of_statements
                      @{elsif condition then
                        sequence_of_statements@}
                      [else
                        sequence_of_statements]
                      end if;
@end example
So rather than define the language template such that the user is forced to
expand @code{sequence_of_statements}, we perform a ``substitution'' ourselves
so that our @code{if} construct looks like:
@example
    if_statement ::=  if condition then
                        statement @{statement@}
                      @{elsif condition then
                        statement @{statement@}@}
                      [else
                        statement @{statement@}]
                      end if;
@end example
Which would lead us to a language template of:

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER IF_STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER IF_STATEMENT -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
    /SEPARATOR="" -
    /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

    "if @{condition@} then"
    "  @{statement@}..."
    "[elsif_part]..."
    "[else_part]"
    "end if;"

END DEFINE
@end example
This step also shows the @code{elsif} and @code{else} portion being
modified for incorporation into the template language. Placeholders may not
span lines, so any EBNF construct that does so must be reduced to a placeholder
that can be produced on one line. The syntax for the @code{if} statement is a
good example of this having to be done. The following shows the equivalent EBNF
and language templates for these structures:
@example
                                        DELETE PLACEHOLDER ELSIF_PART -
elsif_part ::=                              /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    elsif condition then                DEFINE PLACEHOLDER ELSIF_PART -
      statement @{statement@}               /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
                                            /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
                                            /DESCRIPTION=""
                                            /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
                                            /SEPARATOR="" -
                                            /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

                                            "elsif @{condition@} then"
                                            "  @{statement@}..."

                                        END DEFINE

                                        DELETE PLACEHOLDER ELSE_PART -
else_part ::=                               /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    else                                DEFINE PLACEHOLDER ELSE_PART -
      statement @{statement@}               /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
                                            /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
                                            /DESCRIPTION=""
                                            /DUPLICATION=CONTEXT_DEPENDENT -
                                            /SEPARATOR="" -
                                            /TYPE=NONTERMINAL -

                                            "else"
                                            "  @{statement@}..."

                                        END Define
@end example

The following is an example of syntax that repeats with a separator string
present. The construct is the (partial) Ada syntax for an object
declaration. Just to provide the context, the (partial) EBNF is shown first.

@example
object_declaration ::=
  defining_identifier_list : [aliased] [constant] subtype_indication [:= \
expression];

    defining_identifier_list ::=
      defining_identifier @{, defining_identifier@}
@end example

Here, @code{defining_identifier_list} is defined as a
@code{defining_identifier} that must occur one or more times and is separated
by the string ``, '' when it does repeat. Thus, this EBNF leads to:

@example
DELETE PLACEHOLDER DEFINING_IDENTIFIER -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
DEFINE PLACEHOLDER DEFINING_IDENTIFIER -
    /LANGUAGE="Ada" -
    /NOAUTO_SUBSTITUTE -
    /DESCRIPTION=""
    /DUPLICATION=HORIZONTAL -
    /SEPARATOR=", " -
    /TYPE=TERMINAL -

    "Type in a valid Ada identifier"

END DEFINE
@end example

Here we can see the /SEPARATOR attribute be used, duplication is set for the
horizontal direction and the placeholder is defined as a TERMINAL placeholder
with an appropriate prompt message.

@node Custom Variables, Technical Notes, Creating and Modifying Templates, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Custom Variables
ELSE has a small (but growing) number of custom variables, these are available
through the Customisation Groups under the customisation group @code{Programming
- Tools - Emacs LSE}. These variables are (listed alphabetically):

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-direction
This variable determines which direction the command
@code{else-move-n-placeholders} will attempt i.e. if the variable is ``on'' then
the command @value{full_next} will be used, if the variable is ``off'' then the
command @value{full_prev} will be used. The default for this variable is 't'
(on). 
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-follow-menus
If true (@code{t}) then menu definitions are 'followed' or expanded until no
sub-entry menu is found and all are combined into a single menu selection
display at the 'top level'. If @code{nil}, then menu's are not expanded and the
user has to traverse sub-menu entries (useful when combining menu's leads to
huge menu selections).

Setting this flag to @code{t} will explicitly override the settings of
individual template definitions that use the @code{/NOFOLLOW} attribute
(@xref{Template Body}.)

The default for this variable is @code{nil} (off) as the default behaviour of
ELSE is to ``follow'' menu definitions unless explicityly told not to by the
@code{/NOFOLLOW} attribute.

This variable may be overriden by the setting of @code{'else-nofollow-menus} to
@code{t}.

This flag is a buffer-local variable so individual buffers can have individual
settings. 

This also means that setting the variable through the Emacs Customisation menu
will set the global value for the variable but not actually affect the setting
of any ``current'' buffers that are using this variable. Only ``new'' buffers
will inherit the new value set via the customisation menu.

See the Emacs manual for instructions on changing a variable from the command
line (Evaluating Emacs-Lisp Expressions).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-ignore-case-in-name-sorts 

Used by ELSE when sorting output (else-extract-all,
else-show-token-names, else-show-placeholder-names ) into alphabetical
order. A value of @code{t} will ignore case when sorting the names
i.e.

@example
PASS
print
RETURN
@end example

A value of @code{nil} will produce a sorted list that is case sensitive i.e.

@example
PASS
RETURN
.
.
print
@end example

The default for this variable is @code{t} (ignore case).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-kill-proceed-to-next-placeholder
This is a ``usability'' variable that controls the behaviour of the command
@value{full_kill} after it has executed. If this variable is set (on)
then ELSE will attempt to perform a @value{full_next} after
successfully killing a placeholder. If the variable is ``off'' then the cursor
will remain at the point at which the kill command was executed. The default is
@code{nil} (off).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-move-and-execute
Another ``usability'' variable. If this variable is ``on'' then after either an
expansion or kill request (@value{full_expand} or @value{full_kill}) which has
failed, then a @dfn{movement} (either a ``next'' or ``previous'' placeholder -
direction is dependent upon the setting of the @code{else-direction} flag)
command is executed and the original operation (expand or kill) will be
attempted again at the new placeholder@footnote{this behaviour was added
specifically for VR Coding and helps reduce the number of voice commands
required to achieve a specific objective}. The default for this variable is
@code{nil} (off).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-nofollow-menus
If true (@code{t}) then menu definitions are @b{not} 'followed' --- when
@code{t}, this variable takes precedence over the setting of
@code{'else-follow-menus} and any @code{/FOLLOW} or @code{/NOFOLLOW} attibutes
of the template definition. If @code{nil}, then the variable becomes
``inactive'' and determination of menu ``follow'' or not is determined based
upon the settings of @code{'else-follow-menus} and thence the @code{/NOFOLLOW}
and @code{/FOLLOW} attributes in that order.

The default for this variable is @code{nil} (off).

This flag is a buffer-local variable so individual buffers can have individual
settings.  

This also means that setting the variable through the Emacs Customisation menu
will set the global value for the variable but not actually affect the setting
of any ``current'' buffers that are using this variable. Only ``new'' buffers
will inherit the new value set via the customisation menu.

See the Emacs manual for instructions on changing a variable from the command
line (Evaluating Emacs-Lisp Expressions).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-only-proceed-within-window
This flag is used only if the else-kill-proceed-to-next-placeholder flag is
set. The movement to the next placeholder will only occur if the placeholder is
visible in the current window. If this flag is off then the movement will
proceed (possibly) causing visual disorientation to the user when the screen
display jumps. The default for this variable is 't' (on).
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-prompt-time
This variable supplies the time which a prompt string to the user is displayed
for a TERMINAL placeholder (@pxref{Type Specifier}). The default is 3 seconds.
@end deffn

@deffn {Custom Variable} else-set-lineno
Controls the display of line numbers in the menu display window. The default for
this variable is @code{nil} (off).
@end deffn

@node Technical Notes, Compatibility, Custom Variables, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Technical Notes
This chapter provides some ``technical'' information that doesn't fall into any
particular category for inclusion in previous chapters. The information offered
covers: 
@enumerate
@item
``useful'' variables/functions that are contained within else-mode.el. This is a
brief description of the some of the variables/functions that an individual
might want to access/call from outside of ELSE to perform various tasks.  This
list is probably not exhaustive but hopefully helpful.  @footnote{Customisable
variables and interactive defuns are documented elsewhere in this manual, the
variables/functions mentioned here are for ``internal'' use and should be used
with discretion}
@item
Editing Template Files
@item
Hooks used in ELSE.
@item
How ELSE determines the file name of a language template.
@item
How to speed up load times of templates on a slow computer.
@end enumerate
@menu
* Useful ELSE Defuns::          
* Editing Template Files::      
* ELSE and Hooks::              
* Building the Language Template File Name::  
@end menu

@node Useful ELSE Defuns, Editing Template Files, Technical Notes, Technical Notes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Useful ELSE Defuns

Description of some useful Defuns that ELSE contains that users can access
(they are non-interactive) from their own elisp Defuns to perform useful
actions. 

@deffn{apropos} else-after-token
Return @code{t} if point is situated immediately after a valid token string for
the language definition in force for that buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-in-placeholder
Returns @code{t} if point is within a valid placeholder for the language
definition in force for that buffer.  See also else-placeholder-start and
else-placeholder-end. 
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-dump-language 
Dump the current buffer language template to the named file.  Note that the file
name parameter must have been already vetted to make sure it complies with the
else naming conventions i.e. .esl
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-establish-language language-name
Set language template set 'language-name as the current template set for this
buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-look-up name-string &optional ignore-forward-refs

Look-up the definition of a placeholder/token called 'name-string.
'ignore-forward-refs allows functions like @code{'else-kill-placeholder} to stop
the forwarding referrals i.e. we wish to kill what is there not what might have
been there
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-placeholder-start
Position in the buffer of the start of the last placeholder detected/found (see
else-in-placeholder). 
@end deffn

@deffn{apropos} else-placeholder-end
Position in the buffer of the end of the last placeholder detected/found (see
else-in-placeholder). 
@end deffn

@node Editing Template Files, ELSE and Hooks, Useful ELSE Defuns, Technical Notes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Editing Template Files

ELSE comes with a template definition language file for creating and maintaining
language template files. It is called template.lse. When editing template
definition files you can have ELSE enabled for the buffer and it will load the
template.lse definitions. However, when performing common ELSE functions (common
to editing a language template file that is) it will perform in terms of the
language of the buffer contents rather than the ELSE template language itself
i.e. if you are editing C.lse and wish to perform an extraction of a current C
language definition then you can run @code{else-extract-placeholder} and it will
look in the C language definitions for the requested definition rather than the
template definitions. Likewise, when compiling the current buffer the
definitions will go into the C language definitions rather than the ELSE
language template definitions. The only exception to this rule is the commands
that are obviously relevant to editing a language definition file in its own
language i.e. @code{else-expand-placeholder} will still be expecting to expand
placeholders and tokens that below to the TEMPLATE definitions rather than the C
definitions. 

@node ELSE and Hooks, Building the Language Template File Name, Editing Template Files, Technical Notes
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@section ELSE and Hooks

Probably the most single significant feature that sets ELSE above any other
equivalent templating system for Emacs is the ability to generate portions of
text that can be easily located (placeholders) and to which the cursor can be
positioned (@pxref{Navigating, Navigating Using ELSE}). Once there, then typing
by the user will cause the automatic deletion of the placeholder and the
insertion of the typed text. This functionality is achieved by ELSE ``hooking''
into the before and after change hooks of Emacs. Here it can monitor what is
happening in the changes to the buffer and take appropriate action (such as the
deletion of a placeholder when `self-insert' text is typed or the duplication of
typed text when the placeholder has identifier and auto-substitute situation
(@pxref{Auto Text Substitute})).

@menu
* Building the Language Template File Name::
@end menu

@node Building the Language Template File Name,  , ELSE and Hooks, Technical Notes
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Building the Language Template File Name

When ELSE mode is invoked for a buffer it will read the name of the major mode
currently in effect and append the file extension ``.lse'' and attempt to load a
file by that name using the 'load-path'. Note that this function is case
sensitive i.e. if the major mode for the buffer is `C' then a file name of
`C.lse' will be constructed and searched. Similarly, if the major mode is
Emacs-Lisp then ELSE will construct a file name of 'Emacs-Lisp.lse'.

If the constructed file name cannot be located in the `load-path' then the user
will be prompted for a file name.

@node Compatibility, Notes for VR Coding, Technical Notes, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Compatibility

ELSE is definitely known not to be compatible with versions of Emacs prior to
Emacs 20.X. Emacs Lisp introduced a change at 19.29 that I took advantage
of and then Emacs 20.X introduced the use of custom variables which are also
used in ELSE.

@node Notes for VR Coding, Template Availability, Compatibility, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@chapter Notes for Voice Recognition Coding

It is recommended that people using Emacs and ELSE for programming using Voice
Recognition tools should set the following custom variables (@pxref{Custom
Variables}). 

@enumerate
@item
@code{else-kill-proceed-to-next-placeholder}
@item
@code{else-set-lineno}
@item
@code{else-move-and-execute}
@item
@code{else-only-proceed-within-window}
@end enumerate

Having these variables set result in a minimum of voice commands to navigate and
input code using ELSE. Refer to demonstration videos using ELSE, that Hans van
Dam has kindly produced, at @url{http://home.hetnet.nl/~vandamhans/index.htm}

@node Template Availability, Tutorial, Notes for VR Coding, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Language Template Availability

The following list indicates what language templates are currently available
from @url{http://www.zipworld.com.au/~peterm}. For further (and a growing list)
of other language templates, kindly made available by Douglas Harter refer to
@url{http://mywebpages.comcast.net/dharter46}. Douglas currently has template
files for Basic, Bliss, Bourne Shell, C Shell, COBOL, DEC DCL, Fortran90,
Fortran, PASCAL, Perl and the list is growing.
@enumerate
@item
Ada83 --- must be renamed to Ada.lse prior to use. Has seen some extensive use in
a programming environment so should be quite ``usable''@footnote{Language
template files have what I would term a @dfn{usability} index as far as ELSE is
concerned. The more extensively they are used in programming the more ``fine
tuning'' has been done to the template definitions and thus they become more
``usable'' by the programmer. Template files that have been freshly translated
from the EBNF of a language have a low usability index and should be regarded by
beginners with extreme caution.}
@item
Ada95 --- must be renamed to Ada.lse to be used. Usability index is moderate, I
used these templates for about 6 months of coding, some obvious paths have not
been fine tuned.
@item
ELSE Template Language (template.lse). Quite usable - use these templates to
create ELSE language definition templates.
@item
LaTeX --- Usable but extremely small sub-set - I don't do documentation this
way anymore - the world is succumbing to MS-Word :-(. 
@item
Emacs-Lisp --- Usable not terrifically extensive.
@item
C --- Usable.
@item
Python --- Usable.
@item
C++ --- Not very Usable. Some work is being done by Stephen Leake. 
@item
Java --- Not very Usable. Nobody is working with this template set to my
knowledge. 
@end enumerate

@node Tutorial, Concept Index, Template Availability, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Tutorial
This tutorial assumes that you have followed the installation instructions and
have downloaded the C language templates (@code{C.lse} and @code{C-cust.lse}),
these files represent the base C language template files (@code{C.lse}) and the
customisation templates that I use for my C programming (@code{C-cust.lse}). For
the tutorial to be as shown, it is important that these two files are used,
otherwise the code samples shown may not be accurate. 

The tutorial uses the C language templates, as C is probably the most recognised
language (everybody has at some time or another been exposed to some form of C
syntax, using any of the other languages for which ELSE templates are available
might not have such a wide recognition factor).

@menu
* Abbreviation Coding::         
* Whole Language Coding::       
@end menu

@node Abbreviation Coding, Whole Language Coding, Tutorial, Tutorial
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using ELSE for Abbreviation Coding
If you are in a ``maintenance'' type role i.e. working with modifying or fixing
existing code files, or perhaps you are completely new to ELSE, then you might
be more interested in the ``abbreviation'' powers of ELSE. 

In these kind of coding situations, you are more likely to wish to just add a
couple of lines of code rather than write completely new code from scratch. In
the case of just adding several lines, then it is convenient to have some quick
and easy way to generate a common code construct. You could type a placeholder
directly into the buffer and then expand it but this is somewhat laborious and
is not necessarily true to the underlying aim of ELSE, which is to reduce
typing. To meet these needs, ELSE offers something called ``tokens''. Tokens are
a template definition that takes a minimal number of characters and turns them
into some desired construct using the expand command (@value{expand}). Most of
the common language constructs available to ELSE should have the common
constructs available as tokens as well as placeholders i.e. one such common
construct is the ``if statement''. To generate an if construct at point in the
buffer, just perform the following key sequence:

@kbd{if}@value{expand}

and you will have the following if construct appear:

@example
  if (@{expression@}) @{
    @{statement@}...
  @}
  [elsif_part]...
  [else_part]
@end example

Again, the cursor will be automatically positioned into the first placeholder
and options similar to that explained in the previous section (@ref{Whole
Language Coding}). 

Another example of a simple, but common construct is the humble comment
statement. In @code{C-cust.lse} there is a token that allows quick and easy
comment generation. Type the following anywhere in the buffer:

@kbd{c}@value{expand}

and you should see the text:
@example
   /* @{text@} */
@end example

The cursor will be positioned within the ``text'' placeholder and the user can
start typing the comment immediately.

@node Whole Language Coding,  , Abbreviation Coding, Tutorial
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Using ELSE for Whole Language Coding
Open a new file, "example.c". When the new file is created, enable ELSE for the
buffer using @kbd{M-x else-mode}. You should see the following in the buffer:

@example
@{compilation_unit@}
@end example

The cursor should be positioned within the placeholder shown. This is a top level
language construct that should lead to all of the possible paths to create a
complete C language file. Expand the placeholder by executing @value{expand},
which should result in the buffer containing:

@example
[module_level_comments]
[#include]...

@{translation_unit@}...
@end example

Again, the cursor will be positioned in the first placeholder
(@code{module_level_comments}) of the expansion. Perform another expansion
(@value{expand}) and this placeholder will be replaced by the following text:

@example
/* ===[ @{module@} ]=========================================================

  Description:

    @{text@}

  Revisions:

    REV     DATE      BY       DESCRIPTION
  ------  ---------   ---      --------------------------------------------

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This item is the property of GTECH Corporation, Providence,
    Rhode Island, and contains confidential and trade secret information.
    It may not be transfered from the custody or control of GTECH except
    as authorized in writing by an officer of GTECH.  Neither this item
    nor the information it contains may be used, transfered, reproduced,
    published, or disclosed, in whole or in part, and directly or
    indirectly, except as expressly authorized by an officer of GTECH,
    pursuant to written agreement.

    Copyright (c) 1996 GTECH Corporation.  All rights reserved.
  ========================================================================*/
@end example

The cursor will now be the next available placeholder (@code{module}). If this
placeholder is expanded (@value{expand}), then the user will receive a prompt
screen with the following text:

@example
Enter the name of the module i.e. gs_lib.c
@end example

This text will be visible for approximately 3 seconds (ELSE prompt time - a
customisable variable). This indicates to the user that there is no further
expansions available from the templates. The prompt string itself offers
informative text meant to help the user provide the required information. The
fact that the placeholder is a ``mandatory'' placeholder (@pxref{Typographical
Conventions}) means that the user must provide a value i.e. the placeholder
cannot be deleted or killed because the syntactic conventions require an entry
to be made at this point.

Type in the text, @kbd{example.c} --- the placeholder will be deleted
automatically when the first letter is typed by the user.

Now navigate to the placeholder @code{include_files} using repeated next
placeholder commands (@value{next}). Expand the placeholder (@value{expand}) and
you will be presented with a menu screen showing two possible choices (as shown
below): 

@example
#include <@{file_name@}>
#include "@{file_name@}"
@end example

Select the first option by pressing the letter @kbd{s} on the keyboard
(selection can also be achieved by re-executing the expansion command
@value{expand} --- this is a convenience option for individuals who may map the
ELSE expand command to a more convenient key sequence i.e. I have the
else-expand-placeholder command mapped to <F3> - by allowing this behaviour, the
user doesn't have to move fingers to achieve menu selection.

Enter the text @code{stdio.h}, the buffer should now contain (excluding the
file header that we have already developed in the interest of saving space):

@example
#include <stdio.h>
[#include]...
@end example

Note that the @code{#include} placeholder has been automatically repeated
(repetition of the placeholder is achieved by the inclusion of the ellipses
(@dots{}) at the end of the placeholder. This allows multiple constructs to be
easily repeated i.e. ELSE does the repetition --- it would be extremely tedious
if the user was forced to type in each placeholder by hand.

Navigate to the next placeholder and delete it using @value{kill}, this will
delete the text of the second instance of the @code{#include} placeholder,
including the braces and ellipses.

Now navigate to the ``translation_unit'' placeholder and expand it, you will be
presented with a menu consisting of the following choices:

@example
function_definition
declaration
@end example

Select the first possibility (@code{function_definition}) to receive the
following text in the buffer:

@example
[declaration_specifiers] @{declarator@}
[declaration]...
@{
  [declaration]...
  [statement]...
@}
@end example

You can navigate backwards (@kbd{C=c /p}) and forwards through these
placeholders, expansion will lead to either prompt strings, menu choices or
simple text substitutions, depending upon the language template definition for
that placeholder. From these simple placeholders an entire language file can be
constructed. Since ELSE generates all of the ``house-keeping'' characters such
as opening and closing braces, semi-colons that end the line etc, when it comes
time to compile this file, then the compiler should report a very much reduced
number of syntactic errors that if the file had been entered by more traditional
methods. 

Hopefully this tutorial has given you some small taste for the power of ELSE and
has whetted your appetite to learn more. Any questions about the contents of
this manual, using ELSE or creating/modifying new templates then just contact me
at the email address on the front page of this manual, or, if that doesn't work,
then you can reach me through the gnu.emacs.help newsgroup, I monitor that group
on all work days of the week (Australian time that is).

@node Concept Index,  , Tutorial, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
@c  LocalWords:  settitle iftex afourpaper setchapternewpage ifinfo Milliken sp
@c  LocalWords:  titlepage center titlefont vskip pt filll dir Keymaps cindex
@c  LocalWords:  elsemode CTRL macs anguage diting dfn lse pxref setfilename VR
@c  LocalWords:  nolonger elsif Elipses mis deffn LRM Integer'Last Color emph
@c  LocalWords:  detailmenu kbd TexInfo texi Pentium ensitive dircategory ditor
@c  LocalWords:  direntry ifnottex Keybindings Placeholders alist capitalize py
@c  LocalWords:  lineno cust NOAUTO DELETE'd DEFINE'd EBNF setnu pdf Defuns SPC
@c  LocalWords:  xref ELSE's templating noindent placeholders Compaq abbrev var
@c  LocalWords:  smallexample keybinding texinfo prev  Leake subsubsection XYZ
@c  LocalWords:  actioned ABC DEF Modula ENBF elsif esl url authorized gs cp
@c  LocalWords:  printindex
